   Give
   (BUTTON)
   Common QuestionEvolution,What is Science?

What is Evolution?

   Properly understood, evolution is a scientific theory about the
   development of life and is consistent with Christian theology.
   Share
--
   Image

   Properly understood, evolution is a scientific theory about the
   development of life and is consistent with Christian theology.

   Properly understood, evolution is a scientific theory about the
   development of life and is consistent with Christian theology.

Introduction

   Providing a definition of “evolution” is tricky because the word is
   used in different ways. First we need to distinguish between the
   broader worldview some associate with evolution and the scientific
   theory of evolution.

Evolution as worldview

   Some people consider evolution to be equivalent to atheism, thinking it
   replaces God or otherwise rules out God’s involvement in the
   development of life. But that is a philosophical or worldview position
   (sometimes called “evolutionism” or simply “naturalism”), not a
   strictly scientific position.

   At BioLogos, we are against evolutionism and instead hold to the
   worldview of Christian theism. We call our position on origins
   “Evolutionary Creation.” That is to say, we believe God is the Creator
   and also accept that evolution is the best scientific description for
   how life has developed. This is similar to saying we believe God
   provides for the growth and development of plants while we also accept
--
   for that process.

Evolution as a scientific theory

   In non-scientific contexts, “theory” usually means something like a
   guess (e.g., I have a theory about…). But in its scientific sense, a
   theory is a tested and well-confirmed explanation for a set of
   observations. The observations explained by the theory of evolution
   come primarily from the fossil record, comparative morphology,
   biogeography, and now most importantly, genetics. Evolution does not
   attempt to give a scientific explanation for the origin of life, but
   only for the development and diversification of lifeforms after the
   first life began.

   The theory of evolution states that all the lifeforms on earth share a
   common ancestor as a result of variation and selection over a very long
   time (currently thought to be around 4 billion years). Variation means
--
   variations were preserved in each group. Eventually the characteristics
   of each group were different enough for scientists to recognize them as
   different species. The theory of evolution claims that a similar story
   could be told for the ancestral lineage of any two species that have
   ever lived.

Debates about evolution

   There is very little debate in the scientific community about this
   broad characterization of evolution (anyone who claims otherwise is
   either uninformed or deliberately trying to mislead). The observational
   evidence explained by common ancestry is overwhelming. Of course new
--

   But that is not to say there are no debates and controversies about
   evolution among those who accept this core view of the theory.
   Evolutionary scientists debate the extent to which the variation
   element is explained by random genetic mutations, and how important
   other selection mechanisms are beyond reproductive fitness. Scientists
   have different views on topics like how gradual evolutionary change is
   and on the details of how natural selection works. And as we’ve already
   seen, there are significant differences of opinion about how to
   interpret various aspects of evolution with respect to worldviews, such
   as whether there is overall direction to evolution, and what the
   significance of evolution is for theology.

   At BioLogos we believe the best contemporary science is consistent with
   Christian theology. Find more information on evolution and the BioLogos
   perspective on origins in the other resources on this page or by
   searching on particular terms in our search box.
--
   Common Question

   What is Evolutionary Creation?
   Image

--
   Common Question

   What is the Genetic Evidence for Human Evolution?
   All questions

--
   Article

   God’s Love is R(evolution)ary
   Image

--
   Post

   Four Fun Ways to Teach Evolution
   Image

