   Subscribe now

Evolution of the eye

   Evolution of the eye

   Linda Parton / Alamy

   They appeared in an evolutionary blink and changed the rules of life
   for ever. Before eyes, life was gentler and tamer, dominated by
   sluggish soft-bodied creatures lolling around in the sea. The invention
   of the eye ushered in a more brutal and competitive world. Vision made
   it possible for animals to become active hunters, and sparked an
   evolutionary arms race that transformed the planet.

   When did eyes evolve?
--
   Advertisement

   The complexity of the eye has long been an evolutionary battleground.
   Ever since William Paley came up with the watchmaker analogy in 1802 –
   which claimed that something as complex as a watch must have a maker –
--

   Charles Darwin was well aware of the argument. In On the Origin of
   Species he admitted that eyes were so complex that their evolution
   seemed “absurd to the highest degree”. But he went on to convincingly
   argue that it only seemed absurd. Complex eyes could have evolved from
--
   possible path from simple to sophisticated.

   Those intermediate forms have now been found. According to evolutionary
   biologists, it would have taken less than half a million years for the
   most rudimentary eye to evolve into a complex “camera” eye like ours.
--
   freshwater creatures related to jellyfish. They have no eyes but will
   contract into a ball when exposed to bright light. Hydras are
   interesting from an evolutionary perspective because their basic
   light-sensing equipment is very similar to that seen in other
   evolutionary lineages, including mammals. It is based on two types of
   protein: opsins, which change shape when light strikes them, and ion
   channels, which respond to the shape-shifting by generating an
   electrical signal. Genetic research suggests that all opsin/ion channel
   systems evolved from a common ancestor similar to hydras, pointing to a
   single evolutionary origin of all visual systems.

   The next step is to evolve a small depression containing the
--
   animal before. Unsurprisingly, their victims counter-evolved. Just a
   few million years later, eyes were everywhere and animals were more
   active and bristling with armour. This burst of evolutionary innovation
   is what we now know as the Cambrian Explosion.

--
   Sign up

More on Evolution of the eye

   The unlikely extremophiles lurking in your kitchen
