   Subscribe now

Evolution

   Evolution

   The Washington Post / Getty

   Evolution is the way living organisms change over time, driven by
   natural selection.

   A revolutionary insight put forward by Charles Darwin in On the Origin
   of Species in 1859, the concept of natural selection was also touted by
   another British naturalist, Alfred Russel Wallace, who had come up with
   the idea at the same time.

   The two men hit upon a mechanism for evolution: all organisms vary and
   some variations are more beneficial than others, helping individuals
   thrive and preferentially pass them on to the next generation. In other
--
   rediscovered, genes were identified as units arranged along the
   chromosomes inside the cell’s nucleus. And in 1937, the “modern
   synthesis” brought these ideas together, defining evolution in genetic
   terms as the “change in the frequency of an allele [gene variant]
   within a gene pool”.
--
   Advertisement

   Though it was made famous by Darwin, the idea of evolution actually
   predates him. By the early 19th century, developments in geology and
   mining had revealed Earth to be inconceivably ancient. It was also
--
   lived on it. One of the first people to try to explain how new species
   formed was Erasmus Darwin, Charles’s grandfather. Another influential
   early evolutionist was the French naturalist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck,
   whose “transmutation of species” theory famously argued that change
   occurs when characteristics acquired during an organism’s lifetime are
   passed on to its offspring.

   In recent years, the theory of evolution itself has evolved. The idea
   that it is entirely driven by natural selection is challenged by new
   discoveries in genetics, epigenetics and developmental biology. There
--
   development and heredity, and that organisms play active roles in their
   own fate and that of their descendants. As a result, a growing number
   of biologists believe we need to extend our ideas of how evolution
   works.

   Evolution also faces a challenge from the rise of the religious
   creationist movement, which believes in the Bible’s account of the
   origins of life of Earth, and rejects evolution on this basis.

   Advertisement
--
   Sign up

More on Evolution

   A bearded seal on the ice in Svalbard
--
Humans

The 2023 discoveries that made us rethink the story of human evolution

   News
