   PMID: 35239015

Biological constraints as norms in evolution

   Mathilde Tahar^ corresponding author ^
--
   Montévil and Mossio (Journal of Theoretical Biology 372:179–191, 2015)
   have proposed to speak of constraints. In this article we analyse the
   causal power of these constraints in the evolution of biodiversity,
   i.e., their positivity, but also the modality of their action on the
   directions taken by evolution. We argue that to fully account for the
   causal power of these constraints on evolution, they must be thought of
   in terms of normativity. In this way, we want to highlight two
   characteristics of the evolutionary constraints. The first, already
   emphasised as reported by Gould (The structure of evolutionary theory,
   Harvard University Press, 2002), is that these constraints are both
   produced by and producing biological evolution and that this circular
   causation creates true novelties. The second is that this specific
   causality, which generates unpredictability in evolution, stems not
   only from the historicity of biological constraints, but also from
   their internalisation through the practices of living beings.
   Keywords: Theory of evolution, Biological constraints, Possibility
   space, Normativity, Biological agency, Historicity

Introduction

   The evolution of biological forms and functions does not seem fully
   explained by the laws that make physics intelligible (Longo et al.,
   2012). Evolution is less a mechanical sequence based on efficient
   causality than a process whose entities are in perpetual change (Dupré
   & Nicholson, 2018; Simons, 2018). It displays a continuity of forms,
   but also a progress: the lineages evolve in certain directions, without
   the space of the possible directions being predetermined. This does not
   mean that there is no stability nor regularity in the evolutionary
   process. On the contrary, evolution appears to be highly channelled. To
   account for biological regularities, Montévil and Mossio have proposed
   a theory of constraints (2015). This concept aims to explain how a
--
   biological systems as a closure of constraints that channel biological
   processes. In this article, we will question the role of these
   constraints in evolution, beyond the scale of biological systems. Our
   aim is to account for their emergence from evolutionary history and to
   understand how they explain, and how they canalise the directions taken
   by evolution. We are therefore less interested in understanding how
   they stabilise biological systems than in identifying the causality of
   these constraints, which makes them a real driving force in evolution
   and generates biodiversity.

   The argument of this article is that biological constraints should be
   thought of as norms when trying to appreciate their causal role in the
   evolution of the biodiversity structure. It has been argued (Longo et
   al., 2012) that constraints in evolution are not necessitating their
   effects but enabling certain evolutionary directions. In this article,
   we wish to take up this idea by analysing more precisely the causal
   force of these constraints in terms of normativity, in order to give a
   concrete account of causation in evolution.

Trying to account for the regularities of evolution

   Evolution appears to be a relatively determined and channelled process.
   It displays a certain coherent stability: the evolution undergone by a
   species appears as linear and progressive; we observe similarities
   between organs performing the same function in different lineages. It
--
   may be inaccessible to some species: as Fodor (2007) says, pigs will
   probably never have wings. But although there is now a solid theory of
   evolution based on Darwinism and genetics, it remains difficult to
   comprehensively account for these regularities and to fully identify
   their sources.

Τelos in evolution?

   In order to explain evolutionary regularities, attempts have sometimes
   been made to use the Aristotelian concept of telos. Dennett for
   instance conceives of evolution as the progressive actualisation of the
   different possible phenotypes within a pregiven “Design Space”: “Design
   is Aristotle’s telos, an exploitation of Order for a purpose” (1995, p.
   64), the purpose of an organ adapted to a given ecological problem.
   What would explain the regularity of evolution would be the limited
   number of available solutions, i.e., of possible phenotypes. Beyond the
   shortcomings of such a teleological approach of evolution (Grene,
   1972), the main problem with this conception is that it implies a form
   of fixism or essentialism, which would consist in thinking that all the
   possible biological forms would be given a priori, from all eternity,
   evolution being just the history of their materialization. This leads
   us back to an idealistic vision, of the same type that Darwin already
   refuted, which made the species a form existing from all time. As
   Darwin showed, species is a naturalist’s abstraction, the species being
   merely more pronounced varieties, the evolution of a lineage consisting
   of the gradual transformation of an individual difference into a
   variety, then a species (Darwin, 2001, p. 54; pp. 60–61). There are no
   pre-ordained forms, prior to evolution.

The library of mendel

   Another way of grasping the regularities in evolution (complementary to
   the first) would be to assume that there would be rules preceding
   evolution, given by genetics. This idea is present in Dennett (1995)
   who speaks of a “Library of Mendel” as a genetic repertoire latently
   indicating the possible directions of evolution. It is true that genes
   structure evolution insofar as they carry the information allowing the
   formation of the organism, and a certain number of genes or groups of
   genes are found in different lineages—such is the case of the Hox gene
--
   2138–2139). The way in which genes are expressed is not preordained and
   depends on the unique biological situation of the organism, which
   results from evolution itself.

Natural selection and the adaptation requirement

   To account for evolutionary regularities, some have proposed to
   conceive of natural selection as an algorithm that would sort through
   the genetic repertoire. According to Dawkins (1996, pp. 46–50), this
--
   to the target, the more they would reproduce. The action of natural
   selection would be comparable to that of this algorithm which
   eliminates the texts furthest from the target; in evolution, the target
   would be adaptation. Even if it takes different forms depending on the
   situation, adaptation would be maintained as the general form of an
--
   adjustment of the species to the ecosystem in which they evolve.
   Therefore, adaptation could be considered as the consistent rule of
   evolution, explained by natural selection and that would account for
   the directions taken by the evolutionary process. However, this rule
   appears to be more of an imperative of efficiency (an individual who is
   not able to survive… does not survive), a minimal condition, than a
   real principle of explanation of the form taken by biodiversity and
   morphological evolution.

Failure of these proposals

   All these attempts to account for the regularities in evolution derive
   from a static, nomological view of evolution as resulting from
   immutable laws. This is why they try to account for the observed
   stabilities in a monolithic way, even if it means falling into a
   deflationary explanation that only gives a negative account of the
   directions taken by evolution. Jointly, the entities under
   consideration (organisms, species) are seen as ontologically preceding
   evolution. This is a substantialist view of evolution, outdated since
   Darwin. Evolution is the process by which species are generated and
   evolve (let us note that it is species or populations that evolve, not
   individuals); from this point of view, both species and organisms are
   secondary to evolution. They take their forms from this process, and,
   above all, they are transient in respect of the process itself.
   Biological evolution is indeed a process in the strong sense given by
   Dupré and Nicholson (2018, pp. 11–14): it is extended in time, and this
   flow of time means change. Change is thus ontologically primary with
--
   relatively stable (Miquel & Hwang, 2016), or, as Peter Simons puts it
   “precipitates of processes” (Simons, 2018, p. 55). What is fundamental
   in evolution is not the entities, which are always transitory, but the
   dynamic processes that give rise to their relative stability (Soto et
   al., 2016a, 2016b).

   Thus, in order to explain the regularities in evolution, it is
   necessary to move away from a nomological and monolithic approach and
   to take into consideration their historicity.

Evolutionary constraints and history

Historical constraints
--
   wish to demonstrate that these conditions alone are not enough to
   explain the diversity of forms or the dynamics of the process.
   Evolution towards adaptation is subject to multiple other conditions,
   which, as Gould shows (2002, pp. 1027–1037), appear as constraints for
   a pan-adaptive explanation; since they are non-classical factors that
--
   their positivity. Gould posits two characteristics of constraint (2002,
   p. 1026):
    1. “Coherent set of causal factors that can promote evolutionary
       change”.^1
    2. “The concept of constraint must include theoretically legitimate
       and factually important positive meanings—i.e., constraints as
       directing causes of particular evolutionary changes—rather than
       only the negative connotations of structural limitations that
       prevent natural selection from crafting an alteration that would
--

   Gould distinguishes three types of constraint, all of which are linked
   to the history of organisms and thus also of evolution. The first is
   the functional constraint, which comes from natural selection, i.e.,
   the necessity of adaptation, the terms of which are set by the current
--
   determined by homological constraints between hairiness and dentition
   that originate in the phyletic singularity of mammalian development.
   These constraints are born of the evolutionary history of organisms,
   but they can also guide future evolution by canalizing evolutionary
   change. This is the case of the fontanelles, constraints specific to
   vertebrates, due to the development of the skeleton, and which
--
   “aptive triangle” based on the model of the triangle used in petrology
   (Fig. 1). Each of the vertices corresponds to one of the three
   constraints, understood as an influence canalizing evolution. To
   explain the appearance of a trait, all the three vertices should be
   considered (the trait will correspond to a point located inside the
   triangle according to the respective influence of these three idealised
   vertices). However, if the condition of evolution is the adaptation of
   organisms, an adaptation subject to internal constraints, what seems
   fundamental to understanding the respective role of these constraints
   in the appearance of a trait and thus, more broadly, the directions
   taken by evolution, is history. For it is history that explains the
   inhomogeneous distributions of organisms across the potential
   morpho-space of good organic design. The occupation of morpho-space is
--

   This conception makes it possible to account for the plurality of
   evolutionary constraints, as well as for their historicity.
   Nevertheless, their action is not only negative: they channel the
   future by opening its possibilities. If constraints were completely
   stable, the evolutionary process would only be entropic, and thus
   predictable: as time progresses, organisms would occupy more and more
   possible places in morpho-space; a decrease in organisation and an
--
   Brandon, 2010) which is opposed to the idea of entropy itself. This
   problem is taken up by Brooks and Wiley (1988). According to them,
   evolution is an entropic phenomenon (because of the variability of
   organisms, the further time goes by, the more possible genotypes, i.e.,
   possible microstates, are occupied by organisms), even though a growing
   organisation in biodiversity is observed, i.e., an increasing distance
   from randomness, both within organisms and in the structuring of
   niches. To understand this, the historical dimension of evolution and
   its constraints must be considered.

--
   from the fact that the phase space itself is historically constituted.
   It transforms while retaining something of its past structure: the
   ontogenetic constraints, born of evolution, canalise the successful
   realisation of genotypes, even if the genotypes not realised may be
   accessible microstates; certain genotypic combinations are also made
--
   Fig. 2

   The entropy in evolution, redesigned from Brooks & Wiley, (1988, p.
   40). The difference between H[max] (increasing entropy maximum) and
   H[obs] (the observed entropy) is organization, while the value of Hobs
   is a measure of the entropy of the system. If this scheme is applied to
   evolutionary lineages (1988, p. 43), H[obs] measures the historically
   realized diversity. The historical exclusion of the expression of
   certain kinds of information is measured by the difference between
--

   Therefore, it is the historical dimension of constraints that gives
   them their positive dynamic. Constraints in evolution emerge from the
   evolutionary process and orient it by redefining the space of
   possibilities. Not only do they canalise change as they prevent
   biological systems from occupying all possible genetic configurations,
--
   is this creative dimension that must now be investigated.

Biological interactions and evolutionary norms

   To understand how these constraints can emerge from evolution while
   canalising it, it is necessary to grasp the very process of evolution
   in its concreteness. Dupré and Nicholson define it, in the same way as
   rain, light or fermentation, as an unowned process (2018, p. 12),
   because the entities of this process are not its substrates but its
   precipitates. Yet, in evolution, the precipitates are at the same time
   the transitory agents of this process, for evolution is the history of
   the interactions of living beings. As Fisher writes, the motor of
   evolutionary change is “in the actual life of living things; in their
   contacts and conflicts with their environments, with the outer world as
   it is to them; in their unconscious efforts to grow, or their more
   conscious efforts to move. Especially, in the vital drama of the
   success or failure of each of their enterprises” (1950, p. 184). Thus,
   it could be said that since evolution belongs to no one in particular,
   it belongs to everyone: it is a process knotted by interactions whose
   agents are in in(de)finite number, that is to say knotted by an
--
Constraints and interactions

   Indeed, if the horizon of evolution is the adaptation of organisms to
   their environment, this constraint is dynamic: it comes from a history
   and shapes this history. It is not a constraint imposed unilaterally
--
   transform this environment. The causality is not unilinear. It cannot
   be said that the niche causes the means of survival of the living being
   and its evolution, since the niche is what allows the living being to
   survive (by definition, otherwise it would not evolve in this precise
   environment). The phenotype of a living being, and its niche are
--
   the other (Fodor & Piattelli-Palmarini, 2011). Niches are not waiting
   to be filled until the day when miraculously the right phenotype
   appears. The evolution of the forms of living beings cannot be
   understood as responses to the constraints set by the environment,
   since environment and its stakes are defined on the basis of phenotypic
--
   It is the history of the co-construction of the niche that supplies the
   conditions for the survival of organisms and species, thereby
   channelling the evolutionary process in certain directions that will
   produce the new constraints of the niche. Thus, these constraints are
   the products of interactions, i.e., concrete, practical relations,
--
   with their environment. Living beings are not (necessarily) cognitive
   agents, but they are agents insofar as they actively take part, through
   their interactions, in evolutionary history. “An updated account of
   evolution […] should, at least, represent adaptive evolution […] as the
   interaction of agents and their affordances. It should take seriously
   the Darwinian insight that evolution is the direct consequence of what
   organisms do” (Walsh, 2015, p. 241). Hence, constraints in evolution
   should rather be thought of as norms.

--
   Several games can be played on the same field, but only one at a time.
   Biological systems therefore obey organisational rules, and their
   playground is the boundaries defined by the planet. Evolution is the
   meeting of changes in the rules of the game and of correlative changes
   in the dimensions of the playing field, inasmuch as these changes are
--

   So far, we have discussed the interaction of organisms with their
   environment, but evolution depends on multiple interactions that go far
   beyond this bilateral relationship. As Darwin himself pointed out, it
   relies on the intensity of the struggle for existence, which is not
--
   agents for access to resources that can take very various forms.
   Although we cannot exhaustively illustrate the complexity of the
   interactive processes at work in evolution (which range from
   competition between cells in development to the differentiated
   extinction of species in catastrophic upheavals), we will nevertheless
--
   One aspect of this competition is the relationship between the parasite
   and its host. This relationship has a normative dimension in that it
   channels the evolution of the two species involved, but this
   channelling is highly dependent on the way the biological agents
   interact in their unique biological situation. The interaction of the
--
   2007), is the development of a strong copulatory capacity in woodlouse
   males (Moreau & Rigaud, 2003). Interactions with Wolbachia have very
   different evolutionary consequences from one species to another, but
   also within populations of the same species. It should also be
   underlined that the resistances are passed on from one generation to
--
   translates into the fact that the woodlouse must evolve to survive (it
   is a good example of the Red Queen hypothesis, Van Valen, 1973). The
   genetic constraint is also involved: evolution depends on the genetic
   variability available. But what really allows these constraints to
   orient evolution and transform the process from which they emerge, is
   the normativity of the interaction itself, as it takes different forms
   from one species to another, and from one population to another.
--
   property par excellence ‘good’ or ‘bad’, depends on the host, the
   microbe, and their interaction. It is by understanding this normative
   relationship that we can grasp the direction taken by evolution. If the
   parasite is not pathogenic, then there can be co-evolution with its
   host; if it is weakly pathogenic, there can be an ‘arms race’; if it is
   highly pathogenic, this can lead to the extinction of the host species.

   These interactions also define their own evolutionary norms in relation
   to their environment. Let’s consider two species of birds from
   different lineages. The first, due to its evolutionary history, can
   only feed on berries while the second can feed on both berries and
   seeds. Suppose that the environment contains berries and seeds in equal
   proportion: it can be assumed that the species that feeds on both
   berries and seeds will feed on the seeds, so as not to compete with the
   other species. Here there are evolutionary processes coming from
   speciation that meet and structure the ecological space. In return,
   this patterning has a retroactive effect on the evolution of these two
   species: the second species may come to lose its ability to ingest
   berries. It is in the reciprocal influence of constrained processes
   that evolutionary normativity emerges.

   Thus, the role of biological constraints in the directions taken by
   evolution depends on the diversity of organisms and their particular
   ecological situation. It is these various concrete interactions that
   explain the creativity of constraints, and which make it necessary to
   speak, in the case of evolution, of evolutionary norms.

Evolutionary norms

   The word norm is used in specific cases in biology: the normal versus
--
   reaction” dealing with phenotypic plasticity (West-Eberhard, 2003;
   Woltereck, 1909). We speak of norm in a broader sense, since it is the
   very causality at work in evolution that we propose to think of as
   normative. In order to draw up an operational definition of the concept
   for evolutionary biology, let us review its different meanings. Apart
   from the strictly mathematical sense, we identify three main meanings,
   based on the definitions listed by Merriam-Webster Dictionary and ATILF
--
       directions to a practice, and it emerges from a particular context
       which comes from the very history of this practice: it is therefore
       historical or evolutionary. The norm has both a creative positivity
       (its power does not only consist in a limitation but also in the
       fact that it constitutes opportunities) and emerges from and
--

   (a) and (b) are static definitions, and therefore are not adequate for
   thinking of evolution. It is from (c) that we think we should speak of
   norms in the evolutionary process although leaving aside the cultural
   framework. These norms are:
    1. Transitory rules which are,
--
       i.e., practices giving them their power and normative meaning.

   Grasping this normativity of biological constraints in evolution also
   allows us to understand their causal modality, beyond traditional logic
   and a substantialist conception of evolution. It is not just a matter
   of replacing one word with another: constraints in evolution do have a
   normative power.

The normative power of evolutionary constraints

Their positive value
--
   2012): they do not cause a predetermined effect. Nor can they be said
   to actualise possibilities, since as we have seen, the possible is not
   predefined in biology. They form opportunities for evolution itself
   (see also Jacob, 1977 or Caporael et al., 2014), opportunities that
   were not predicted, and which generate real novelties.
--
   molars which can crush food. However, crushing food with the mouth was
   and still is not an actual possibility at all for Chordates without
   articulated jaws” (Ibid., p. 4575). The evolutionary novelty of
   articulated jaws is part of the organisation of an organism in such a
   way that it becomes a structural constraint, but also widens the space
--
   biological organizations, making its complete disappearance unlikely to
   be viable” (Ibid., p. 4576). Both a channelling force and a breeding
   ground for innovation, evolutionary constraints have both aspects (1)
   and (2) of norms. We may add from the example we have just studied that
   it also has a creative dimension (3).
--
   of history. This example follows on from an excerpt of The Genealogy of
   Morals by Nietzsche on historical research, that Gould (2002, p. 1216)
   uses to think of evolution: “‘Namely, that the origin or the emergence
   of a thing and its ultimate usefulness, its practical application and
   incorporation into a system of ends, are toto coelo [entirely, or
--
   requisitioned anew, transformed and directed to a new purpose’”. Rather
   than simply referring to cases of exaptation (a change in function of a
   structure in the course of evolution), Gould gives an example of what
   could be called an “overloading” (Longo, 2018, pp. 457–458) which
   further reveals the abundant and unpredictable creativity of
   evolutionary constraints. While Gould does not embrace the full
   Nietzschean analysis, he “do[es] appreciate Nietzsche’s point, which
   can be translated into evolutionary terms as the source of constraint”
   (Gould, 2002, p. 1218). He adds: “The original reason does continue to
   exert a hold upon history through the structural constraints that
--
   built for the original context” (Ibid.). This diversion through
   Nietzsche underlines the fact that the historical constraints that have
   come to crystallise in evolution also constitute reserves of
   potentialities. Gould refers to the remarkable case of overloading
   found in the black heron Egretta Ardesiaca, which uses its wings to
--
   arrows An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object
   name is 40656_2022_483_Figa_HTML.gif reflect the functionalist
   interpretation of the theory of evolution, which sees history and
   structure as constraints imposed on the functional vertex. The arrows
   An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name
--
   There is a causal circularity coming from the perpetual
   reinterpretation of the constraints by the organisms which make them
   true evolutionary norms. From this perspective, it should be underlined
   that some constraints did not emerge from the functional vertex: there
   are some actual aptive features which were originally non-aptations.
   Their evolutionary meaning changed in the course of history. This is
   the case of the fontanelles we mentioned. This also the case of the
   repetitive DNA that Gould and Vrba describe as “nonapted features,
--
   (with secondary adaptive modification if altered)” (1982, p. 11).
   Another example provided by Gould (2002, pp. 1282–1284) which will
   enable us to apprehend the evolutionary dynamics of these constraints,
   this time on an ecological scale, is that of Linepithema humile. In
   Argentina, these ants split into colonies of genetically closer
--
   These examples show the creativity of constraints (3) through their
   perpetual reinterpretation. They reveal the way in which these
   reinterpretations emerge from evolution itself, as a historical process
   (2), while at the same time channelling that same process (1). But it
   is (4) that is crucial to understanding the modality of their causal
--
   constraints of these rules have provided more flexibility in their
   fecund channels than limitations through their 'forbidden places'”
   (Ibid., p. 1272). But how do these constraints orient evolution towards
   non-determined possibilities? How do they induce evolutionary change?
   By what causality do they channel evolution? There are two
   indissociable questions here: what is the exact modality of their
   causal power? And where do they get this causal power from? This is
   where we think it is crucial to understand evolutionary constraints as
   norms: these two questions are resolved if the power of these
   constraints is understood as normative.
--
   also possible, i.e., it can be false). These four modalities imply a
   pre-determined space of possibilities, and hence appear insufficient
   for thinking of the causal force of evolutionary constraints, and of
   their potential. Most physical laws entail a necessity: they indicate
   that, in a given situation, if the conditions are met, the effect will
--
   characterise the situations in which they are actualised make them
   shifting norms that do not display a predictive uniformity. And yet, if
   they widen the possibilities of evolution, they allow the organisation
   of biological phenomena, in so far as evolution is not a process that
   would tend more and more towards randomness. This is why their
   normative power cannot be considered as part of the category of
   possibility either. They orient evolution in such a way that it does
   not realise just any possibility, but some possibilities rather than
   others: the most functional and relevant ones, the possibilities
   leading to an increasingly organised evolution.

   Mumford and Anjum seek a third modal path between necessity (and its
--
Normative modality and biological practices

   But this approach seems insufficient for biological evolution, in two
   respects. On the one hand, it does not account for the reconfiguration
   of the space of possibilities specific to biological evolution. The
   authors conceive the dispositional modality as applying to any
   phenomenon. They underline that there are degrees of possibilities,
   which seem to be linked to probability. Yet, probability is a measure
   on a given space of possibilities. Thus, they do not address the truly
   innovative nature of the possibilities created during evolution. The
   authors investigate the causal link between A and its typical
   manifestation B. But in evolution, B is not predetermined, and is
   therefore not predictable no matter how much information is available
   about A. It is no coincidence that the biological example given by
   Mumford and Anjum is not borrowed from evolutionary biology. In
   evolution there are no typical manifestations, only special cases. As
   Longo puts it «biological events are rare […] in view of their
   biological specificity or historicity: each event is individually rare,
   even if this type of events happens continually in evolution and
   contribute to the construction of all phylogenetic paths” (2018, p.
   469). On the other hand, the authors underline the close link between
   the manifestation of the effect and the continuity of the process that
   causes it, but do not account for the fact that, in evolution, the
   causality displays a creative circularity: the evolutionary norms, are
   both produced by and producers of the evolutionary process. They
   indicate that what accounts for dispositionality in biology is the fact
   that life is made up of activities, but do not directly link these
--

   We believe, on the contrary, that these activities must be at the
   centre of a conception of causality in evolution, since it is they that
   account for the creativity of evolutionary constraints as well as their
   specific causality. It is because constraints arise from interactions
   that are woven by agents, and because, from this point of view, they
   constitute real biological norms, that they have the power to canalise
   evolution. To understand the causality of constraints in evolution, it
   is therefore necessary to take into consideration the agency of living
   beings. For it is living beings that internalise and manifest them
   through practices, i.e., activities that are embedded in and transform
   their living conditions and thus the rest of evolution. This is why, to
   envision this driving role of organisms in evolution, Walsh proposes an
   agent theory. For ecological constraints, for example, to have a truly
   positive action, they must form opportunities for organisms. Hence, the
--
   living themselves actively constitute the constraints to which they are
   subject, through their agency (Ibid., p. 173). Thus, the power of the
   evolutionary constraints comes from their normative part, from the way
   in which living beings internalise them in activities that create new
   constraints that can transform evolutionary history. If we look back at
   the example of the functional overloading of the black heron’s wings,
   the morphological constraint (the feathers) resulting from the
--
   processes. And in return, this constraint allowed the emergence of a
   further new practice (and therefore also a new function) through the
   use of the parasol wing. The creative circularity of evolutionary
   constraints becomes illuminating when they are understood as norms
   whose multiple meanings arise from the concrete practices of organisms
--
   concretely tied up by the agents involved, that evolvability is played
   out. Neither the historical, morphological and ecological data nor the
   imperative of adaptation determine the directions taken by evolution.
   Instead, these constraints act as norms that living beings internalise
   into biological activities canalising future evolution. Let us
   emphasise that internalisation here is not psychological nor
   subjective: living beings are not necessarily cognitive agents, but
--
   This leads us to the first point that the dispositional modality failed
   to account for: the change in the space of possibilities, and thus the
   unpredictability of evolution. The various consequences of the presence
   of Wolbachia on the evolution of its host reveal the importance of the
   internalisation of norms in interactions which are always particular
   cases. The biological norm is always local and transitory, i.e.,
   specific to a time and place in evolutionary history. And it is within
   these “rare” conditions—in the sense given by Longo (2018): specific,
   historical—that living beings experience these norms through practices
   that are also rare. Therefore, it is because evolutionary constraints
   constitute norms for living beings that they can be truly innovative:
   they owe their power to the way organisms internalise them. They arise
   from the evolutionary process as it is shaped by the activities and
   practices of living beings, but they also channel this process, and
   even generate its future possibilities, through internalisation, i.e.,
--
   them through practices in the specificity of their unique situation. It
   is precisely because these norms are internalised in the practices of
   particular agents in specific situations that evolution is truly
   unpredictable (the phase space is perpetually changing).

--
   through an equally particular or rare practice C. It is from this
   internalisation that biological constraints derive their power: they
   become norms for evolution.

Conclusion

   Our aim was to clarify the causal power of biological constraints on
   the evolution of biodiversity. We argued that this power became
   illuminating if thought of in terms of normativity. We began with a
   critical moment aimed at identifying the inadequacies of the
   explanations traditionally proposed to account for regularities in
   biology. Moving away from these nomological, often monolithic, and in
   any case static conceptions of evolution, we proposed an analysis of
   the multiple constraints that canalise the forms taken by biodiversity.
   We highlighted that these constraints were historical, and that this
--
   may be vital or fatal for the survival of organisms, and they redefine
   their conditions of existence. This led us to reconceptualise
   biological constraints in evolution in terms of evolutionary norms,
   embracing four characteristics. They appear as binding conditions for
   biological evolution (1), deriving from the evolutionary process
   itself, while channelling it and opening its future possibilities (2).
   These possibilities are not predetermined in a predefined phase space
--
   these norms in practices specific to their particular situation (4).
   Finally, we have shown that conceiving biological constraints in
   evolution as evolutionary norms allows us to shed light on the modality
   of their causal power, inadequately captured by the categories of
   traditional logic inherited from Aristotle, while accounting for the
--
   constraints, nor the work on process biology, but it is meant to
   elucidate the role of constraints on the directions taken by biological
   evolution, bringing forward the agency of living beings.

Footnotes
--
     * Bailly F, Longo G. Biological organization and anti-entropy.
       Journal of Biological Systems. 2009;17(1):63–96. [Google Scholar]
     * Brooks DR, Wiley EO. Evolution as entropy. Toward a unified theory
       of biology. University of Chicago Press; 1988. [Google Scholar]
     * Canguilhem G. Le normal et le pathologique. Presses Universitaires
       de France; 1966. [Google Scholar]
     * Caporael LR, Griesemer JR, Wimsatt WC. Developing scaffolds in
       evolution, culture, and cognition. The MIT Press; 2014. [Google
       Scholar]
     * Charlat S, Reuter M, Dyson EA, Hornett EA, Duplouy A, Davies N,
--
       Biology. 2007;17:273–277. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Cordaux R, Bouchon D, Grève P. The impact of endosymbionts on the
       evolution of host sex-determination mechanisms. Trends in Genetics.
       2011;27:332–341. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Darwin, C. (2001). On the origin of species (pp. 18202–1291). The
       Pennsylvania State University, Electronic Classics Series, Jim
       Manis, Faculty Editor, PA.
     * Dawkins R. The blind watchmaker: Why the evidence of evolution
       reveals a universe without design. W. W. Norton & Company Inc;
       1996. [Google Scholar]
--
       oogenesis in a parasitic wasp. PNAS. 2001;98:6247–6252. [PMC free
       article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Dennett DC. Darwin’s dangerous idea. Evolution and the meanings of
       life. Penguin Books; 1995. [Google Scholar]
     * Dupré J, Nicholson DJ. A manifesto for a processual philosophy of
--
     * Fodor J, Piattelli-Palmarini M. What darwin got wrong. Profile
       Books; 2011. [Google Scholar]
     * Gould SJ. The structure of evolutionary theory. Harvard University
       Press; 2002. [Google Scholar]
     * Gould SJ, Lewontin R. The spandrels of San Marco and the
--
     * Grene M. Aristotle and modern biology. Journal of the History of
       Ideas. 1972;33(3):395–424. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Jacob F. Evolution and tinkering. Science.
       1977;196(4295):1161–1166. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Kingsolver JG, Koehl MAR. Aerodynamics, thermoregulation, and the
       evolution of insect wings: Differential scaling and evolutionary
       change. Evolution. 1985;39:488–504. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Leclercq S, Thézé J, Chebbi MA, Giraud I, Moumen B, Ernenwein L,
       Grève P, Gilbert C, Cordaux R. Birth of a W sex chromosome by
--
       2016;113:15036–15041. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Longo G., Montévil M. & Kauffman S. (2012). No entailing laws, but
       enablement in the evolution of the biosphere. In GEECO’12:
       Proceedings of the 14th annual conference companion on Genetics and
       evolutionary computation, 1379–1392.
     * Longo G. How future depends on past and on rare events in systems
       of life. Foundations of Science. 2018;23(3):443–474. [Google
       Scholar]
     * McShea DW, Brandon RN. Biology’s first law: The tendency for
       diversity and complexity to increase in evolutionary systems.
       University of Chicago Press; 2010. [Google Scholar]
     * Méthot P-O, Alizon S. What is a pathogen? Toward a process view of
--
       Biophysics and Molecular Biology. 2016;122(1):16–23. [PMC free
       article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Van Valen L. A new evolutionary law. Evolutionary Theory.
       1973;1:1–30. [Google Scholar]
     * Walsh D. Organisms, agency, and evolution. Cambridge University
       Press; 2015. [Google Scholar]
     * West-Eberhard MJ. Developmental plasticity and evolution. Oxford
       University Press; 2003. [Google Scholar]
     * Woltereck R. Weitere experimentelle Untersuchungen über
