   PMID: 30816905

Science and evolution

   Claudia A.M. Russo^ 1 ^and Thiago André^ 2
--
Abstract

   Evolution is both a fact and a theory. Evolution is widely observable
   in laboratory and natural populations as they change over time. The
   fact that we need annual flu vaccines is one example of observable
   evolution. At the same time, evolutionary theory explains more than
   observations, as the succession on the fossil record. Hence, evolution
   is also the scientific theory that embodies biology, including all
   organisms and their characteristics. In this paper, we emphasize why
   evolution is the most important theory in biology. Evolution explains
   every biological detail, similar to how history explains many aspects
   of a current political situation. Only evolution explains the patterns
   observed in the fossil record. Examples include the succession in the
   fossil record; we cannot find the easily fossilized mammals before 300
--
   Additionally, the fact that we are able to construct fairly consistent
   phylogenetic trees using distinct genetic markers in the genome is only
   explained by evolutionary theory. Finally, we show that the processes
   that drive evolution, both on short and long time scales, are
   observable facts.
   Keywords: evolutionary theory, science, scientific method, scientific
   theory, macroevolution

   In recent years, the teaching of creationism within science curricula
--
   2011; Baltzley, 2016; Ross, 2017), where many bills have been submitted
   to the Houses of Representatives encouraging teachers to express their
   criticism about evolution. In more serious cases, such as Turkey,
   evolution has recently been removed from the high school curriculum
   (Kingsley, 2017), and in Brazil, intelligent design research has
   recently reached university level (Silva, 2017). The rise of
--
   scientists to hastily step into the scene. With this in mind, we felt
   compelled to address basic aspects of science and of the scientific
   method in the evolution versus divine creation debate in a scientific
   journal.

--
   discovered facts.

Evolution as a fact and theory

   Evolution is a population concept. An individual does not evolve; only
   populations evolve in the face of the genetic changes accumulated from
   one generation to the next. The flu virus evolves. This explains why
   last years’ flu vaccine does not work on the current strain of the
   virus: only the resistant strains of the virus survived last year’s
   vaccine application. This is a textbook example of evolution by natural
   selection. Genetic modifications are encountered in the resistant
   strains; thus, evolution is a fact (Gould, 1981). Mutation, migration,
   natural selection, and genetic drift are the evolutionary forces that
   drive genetic changes of natural populations from one generation to the
   next. This is known among biologists as microevolution.

   On the other hand, evolutionary theory explains more than those facts
   that we can routinely observe. This makes it a theory, but is it just a
   theory? The word theory has distinct meanings in science and in lay
--
   Furthermore, the more universal the theory, the more robust it becomes
   with time, as more tests would have been performed. According to
   Darwin, evolutionary theory is centred around two points (Darwin,
   1859). First, from one generation to the next, natural populations
   change over time by a process of natural selection. Second, all
   organisms have a common ancestor, and the time since this last common
   ancestor lived is inversely proportional to the similarities that the
   organisms will share today. Hence, evolutionary theory is universal
   because it includes all (living and fossil) biological diversity and
   has implications for all heritable characteristics of life. Since 1859,
   evolutionary theory has become the most universal and, hence, widely
   tested of the scientific theories in biology.

--
   have provided more details on how natural populations evolve. One
   example is the understanding that, at the molecular level, random
   evolution, rather than natural selection, plays the most important role
   (Kimura, 1991). This is known as the neutral theory, which completed
   its 50^th anniversary in 2018.
--
   The substance of Darwin’s original theory, however, remains. Theodosius
   Dobzhansky (1973) shared his astonishment that Charles Darwin proposed
   the theory of evolution without many key biological concepts, such as
   that DNA is the molecule responsible for heredity. Half a century after
   Dobzhansky’s paper, it remains impressive that the theory of evolution
   still stands valid in light of the discoveries of the molecular biology
   revolution. Each newly sequenced genome tests some aspects of Darwin’s
   theory, and, on each case, the sequence has been consistent with
   Darwin’s prediction of the shared evolutionary history of life. The
   sharp increase in scope and universality of evolution has strengthened
   Darwin’s original proposal and made evolutionary theory one of the most
   reliable and tested theories in the natural sciences (National Academy
   of Sciences, 2008).

   Some creationists dispute this information, claiming that scientists
   discredit data that go against evolutionary theory. Nonetheless, there
   is no room for considering worldwide, long-lasting conspiracies in
   science, as scientific fame and recognition come from the demolition of
   old theories, not from adherence to them (Atkins, 1995). Indeed,
   scientists themselves have challenged many aspects of the original
   Darwinian theory of evolution, such as the importance of neutral
   evolution, the discovery of epigenetics, the proposal of punctuated
   equilibrium, etc. When these challenges were first proposed, they were
   not ignored; they were published in top scientific journals and have
--

   Furthermore, if scientists were dishonestly accepting a false theory of
   evolution, Lamarck’s theory of inheritance of acquired characters would
   still be considered valid today. However, it is not. In the XIX
   century, August Weissman (1889) removed the tails of 20 generations of
--
   descendants’ tails. Scientists themselves devised the scientific
   experiment that bluntly rejected Lamarck’s proposal as a mechanism of
   evolution (Dobzhansky, 1973). Scientists do not discredit data that
   goes against evolution; otherwise, Lamarck’s idea would still be
   accepted. They discredit scientific untestable theories and
   explanations that were not gathered using the scientific method.
--
   Just as human history explains the geopolitical configurations of our
   world today, modern biological systems are a direct result of their
   evolutionary past. Hence, evolutionary theory is the cornerstone of the
   discipline of biology (Rutledge and Warden, 2000). The discipline of
   biology today is an instantaneous portrayal of the dynamic evolutionary
   axis that arose with the origin of life and has been changing by
   evolution ever since (Figure 2). With the first life, genetics,
   ecology, biochemistry and evolution began.
   An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name
   is 1415-4757-GMB-1678-4685-GMB-2018-0086-gf02.jpg
   Open in a separate window
   Figure 2
   The relationship between evolution and biology. Ever since the origin
   of life, evolutionary processes, such as mutation, selection, and
   genetic drift, are responsible for genetic change in natural and
   laboratory populations. Hence, biology is an instantaneous snap-shot of
   the dynamic evolutionary axis. This simplified figure illustrates some,
   of the many, faunal explosions that have took place since the origin of
   life.

   As a scientific theory, however, which facts does evolutionary theory
   explain? One pivotal example is the succession in the fossil record.
   This evolution, namely, macroevolution, explains the larger
   evolutionary picture that is the appearance of the greater groups, such
   as the evolution of mammals, insects, and plants. Fossilized mammals
   are easily recognized, as they have distinct types of teeth, such as
   molars, canines, and incisors. These vertebrates are also very likely
--
   2013), birds, whales (Thewissen, 2009), horses, and humans. These
   successions in the fossil record are the most obvious evidence to
   macroevolution (Figure 2). In fact, the entire fossil record is a set
   of millions of intermediate fossils that provide solid evidence of how
   macroevolution worked in the past billion years.

Evolutionary processes that drive micro and macroevolution are facts

   To have a better understanding of evolution, we must discuss the
   processes that drive evolution. For this, we start by comparing
   processes that drive microevolution with those that drive
   macroevolution. Many of the same evolutionary processes that drive
   microevolution also drive macroevolution, namely natural selection,
   mutation, migration, and genetic drift. A lineage will tend to
   diversify if it has adaptations that increase survival and reproductive
--
   increase population size and the geographical distribution of the
   ancestral species that will more likely speciate into two descendant
   species. Hence, according to this view, macroevolution is
   microevolution on a larger scale (Zimmer, 2001), with biological
   speciation as the only additional process (Russo et al., 2016). Through
   speciation, one ancestral species gives rise to two descendant species
--
   we observe biological species with interbreeding members and
   reproductive isolation between species is compatible with both separate
   creation and macroevolution. So, which observable pattern would we
   expect if many speciation events generated the vast biological
   diversity from a single common ancestor? In this case, we would expect
--
   and a frog. For instance, the cellular respiration is a process shared
   by ferns and frogs and it is an evidence of their common ancestry. Only
   macroevolution explains well the distinct degrees of similarity between
   these four isolated species, as the age of their last common ancestor
   is inversely proportional to the similarity between any two species.
--
   we would expect if all life had a common ancestry.

   Other fossil record patterns are well explained by macroevolution. For
   instance, why do we find a major increase in mammalian fossil diversity
   only after the disappearance of non-avian dinosaurs approximately 65
   million years ago? The same pattern is observed in the fossil record of
   birds. Macroevolution explains this well, as the extinction of
   dinosaurs eliminated competition, and the surviving ancestral mammals
   were able to increase in number and diversified through speciation,
--
   explanation for a natural phenomenon, we eliminate the possibility of
   eventually being able to explain it naturally. Thus, the scientific
   revolution begun when we eliminated the divine as a scientific
   explanation.

   Science, as a process, starts with the acceptance of our ignorance
   about a natural phenomenon and by seeking natural explanations for it.
   Hence, ignorance drives the engine of Science. Even if evolution were,
   hypothetically, rejected, contested by new data, scientists would have
   to study hard to find an alternative natural explanation that was able
   to explain everything that evolution explains today plus the new data
   that contested it.

   Evolution is a fact and a well-supported scientific theory. It has
   endured daily and rigorous testing, and it stands as the unifying
   theory in biology (Rutledge and Warden, 2000). This says nothing about
   whether God created or did not create the world, as science is unable
   to distinguish a divinely guided evolution from a materialistic
   evolution. God may well have created the biological world through
   natural selection, mutation, speciation, extinction, etc. Still,
   evolution and Science would remain unscathed as Science is not
   concerned with why or who, but only with how.

   Some creationists say that we must bring the evolution versus
   creationist debate to the classroom and claim that the opposition to
   the debate is anti-scientific. However, science is not about blind
--

   A recent study has suggested that science concepts, more than
   evolutionary basics, are critical to promoting evolution (Dunk et al.,
   2017). One way to reinforce these fundamentals would be the requirement
   of evolution and science fundaments in admission policies for biology
   professionals, particularly teachers (Larkin and Perry-Ryder, 2015; see
   Rutledge and Warden, 2000 for statistics).
--
       sex. John Murray, London, 450 p.
     * Dobzhansky T. Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of
       evolution. Am Biol Teach. 1973;75:87–91. [Google Scholar]
       Dobzhansky T (1973) Nothing in biology makes sense except in the
       light of evolution. Am Biol Teach 75:87-91.
     * Dunk RDP, Petto AJ, Wiles JR, Campbell BC. A multifactorial
       analysis of acceptance of evolution. Evol Edu Outreach. 2017;10:4.
       [Google Scholar]
       Dunk RDP, Petto AJ, Wiles JR and Campbell BC (2017) A
       multifactorial analysis of acceptance of evolution. Evol Edu
       Outreach 10:4.
     * Futuyma DJ, Kirkpatrick M. Evolution. 4th edition. Sinauer;
       Sunderland: 2017. p. 594. [Google Scholar]
       Futuyma DJ and Kirkpatrick M (2017) Evolution. 4^th edition.
       Sinauer, Sunderland, 594 p.
     * Ghose T. Just a theory: 7 Misused Science Words. 2013. [accessed 19
--
       Gilbert SW (1991) Model building and a definition of science. J Res
       Sci Teach 28:73-79.
     * Gould SJ. Evolution as fact and theory. Discover. 1981;2:34–37.
       [Google Scholar]
       Gould SJ (1981) Evolution as fact and theory. Discover 2:34-37.
     * Jackson DF, Doster EC, Meadows L, Wood T. Hearts and minds in the
       science classroom: The education of a confirmed evolutionist. J Res
       Sci Teach. 1995;32:585–611. [Google Scholar]
       Jackson DF, Doster EC, Meadows L and Wood T (1995) Hearts and minds
       in the science classroom: The education of a confirmed
       evolutionist. J Res Sci Teach 32:585–611.
     * Kimura M. The neutral theory of molecular evolution: A review of
       recent evidence. Jpn J Genet. 1991;66:367–386. [PubMed] [Google
       Scholar]
       Kimura M (1991) The neutral theory of molecular evolution: A review
       of recent evidence. Jpn J Genet 66:367-386. [PubMed]
     * Kingsley P. Turkey drops evolution from curriculum, angering
       secularists. 2017. [accessed 19 January 2019].
       https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/23/world/europe/turkey-evolution-hi
       gh-school-curriculum.html.
       Kingsley P (2017) Turkey drops evolution from curriculum, angering
       secularists,
       https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/23/world/europe/turkey-evolution-hi
       gh-school-curriculum.html (accessed 19 January 2019)
     * Kutschera U, Elliot JM. Do mudskippers and lungfishes elucidate the
       early evolution of four-limbed vertebrates? Evol Edu Outreach.
       2013;6:8. [Google Scholar]
       Kutschera U and Elliot JM (2013) Do mudskippers and lungfishes
       elucidate the early evolution of four-limbed vertebrates? Evol Edu
       Outreach 6:8.
     * Larkin DB, Perry-Ryder GM. Without the light of evolution: A case
       study of resistance and avoidance in learning to teach high school
       biology. Sci Edu. 2015;99:549–576. [Google Scholar]
       Larkin DB and Perry-Ryder GM (2015) Without the light of evolution:
       A case study of resistance and avoidance in learning to teach high
       school biology. Sci Edu 99:549–576.
--
       Meyer D and El-Hani C (2013) O que está em jogo no confronto entre
       criacionismo e evolução. Filos Hist Biol 8:211-222.
     * Miller JD, Scott EC, Okamoto S. Public acceptance of evolution.
       Sci. 2006;313:765–766. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
       Miller JD, Scott EC and Okamoto S (2006) Public acceptance of
       evolution. Sci 313:765-766. [PubMed]
     * Miller ER, Moro PL, Cano M, Shimabukuro TT. Deaths following
       vaccination: What does the evidence show? Vaccine.
--
       many species are there on Earth and in the Ocean? PLoS Biology
       9:e1001127. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
     * National Academy of Sciences . Science, evolution and creationism.
       National academies; Washington: 2008. p. 88. [Google Scholar]
       National Academy of Sciences (2008) Science, evolution and
       creationism. National academies, Washington, 88 p. [PMC free
       article] [PubMed]
     * Paz-y-Miño G, Spinosa A. On the theory of evolution versus the
       concept of evolution: Three observations. Evol Edu Outreach,
       2011;4:308–312. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
       Paz-y-Miño G and Spinosa A (2011) On the theory of evolution versus
       the concept of evolution: Three observations. Evol Edu Outreach,
       4:308-312. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
     * Project 2061 American Association for the Advancement of Science .
--
       Russo CAM, Aguiar B, Voloch CM and Selvatti AP (2016) When Chinese
       masks meet phyologenetics. Am Biol Teacher 78:241-247.
     * Rutledge ML, Warden MA. Evolutionary theory, the nature of science
       & High School Biology teachers: Critical relationships. Am Biol
       Teacher. 2000;62:23–31. [Google Scholar]
       Rutledge ML and Warden MA (2000) Evolutionary theory, the nature of
       science & High School Biology teachers: Critical relationships. Am
       Biol Teacher 62:23-31.
--
       Weismann A (1889) Essays upon Heredity and Kindred Biological
       Problems. Clarendon, Oxford.
     * Zimmer C. Evolution, the triumph of an idea. Harper Collins; New
       York: 2001. p. 528. [Google Scholar]
       Zimmer C (2001) Evolution, the triumph of an idea. Harper Collins,
       New York, 528 p.
     __________________________________________________________________
