          + Cancer
          + Cell and Molecular Biology
          + Ecology and Evolution
          + Genetics and Genomics
          + Immunology
--
    1. ← Back to Behind the Paper
    2.
    3. The origin and evolution of woolly rhinoceros in the view of
       ancient DNA

--
   Behind the Paper

The origin and evolution of woolly rhinoceros in the view of ancient DNA

   Woolly rhinoceros is one of the most popular species of the Ice Age,
   which has been attracting great interests from both the scientific
   community and the public. In recent years, technical advances in
   ancient DNA have provided powerful tools for exploring the evolution of
   this extinct star species.
   Published Oct 11, 2023
--
   Ancient mitogenomes reveal a high maternal genetic diversity of
   Pleistocene woolly rhinoceros in Northern China - BMC Ecology and
   Evolution

   Background Woolly rhinoceros (Coelodonta antiquitatis) is a typical
--
   exhibit higher nucleotide diversity than those from Siberia. Conclusion
   Our findings highlight Northern China as a possible refugium and a key
   evolution center of the Pleistocene woolly rhinoceros.

   The rhino family once evolved into at least 100 species, inhabited from
--
   the early members of the genus Coelodonta originated in Northern China
   and numerous woolly rhinoceros remains excavated in this region,
   Northern China holds a crucial importance in the evolutionary history
   of this genus. Paleontologists carried out a series of exploration on
   fossil materials of Coelodonta in terms of morphological analyses, and
--
   genomes from fossil materials. Until present, the outcomes of
   paleogenomic studies have fundamentally changed our understanding of
   the evolutionary history of many extinct/extant species. Especially,
   woolly mammoth, as one of the iconic members of
   “Mammuthus-Coelodonta faunas”, has become a model species for ancient
--
   Our team has been dedicated to DNA studies of
   Chinese Pleistocene-Holocene vertebrates over the past two decades,
   trying to explore the evolutionary history of the analyzed populations.
   We have focused on members of “Mammuthus-Coelodonta faunas” from
   Northern China, such as woolly mammoth, straight-tusked elephant,
--
   at that time. However, the initial results and context of our previous
   ancient DNA studies on other Pleistocene mammals greatly sparked our
   interest in studying the genetic evolution of woolly rhinoceros.

   Figure 3. Salawusu, Inner Mongolia, Northern China——with a high
--

   In summary, our new genetic data not only indicates the surprising
   result that Northern China could be an important evolutionary center
   for woolly rhinoceroses during the Pleistocene, but also suggests that
   this famous extinct rhino possibly originated in this region rather
   than in Europe that derived from fossil records. Although our
   preliminary study has only uncovered the tip of the iceberg on the
   evolutionary history of this rhino species, our findings herein
   highlight that ancient DNA sequences from Chinese individuals are very
   important for revealing the full picture of the evolution of woolly
   rhinoceros, which will also have the enlightenment significance for
   exploring the evolutionary history of the other members of
   “Mammuthus-Coelodonta faunas” under the influence of global climate and
   environmental changes in Quaternary.
--
   Ecology
   Life Sciences > Biological Sciences > Ecology
     * BMC Ecology and Evolution BMC Ecology and Evolution

BMC Ecology and Evolution
       An open access, peer-reviewed journal interested in all aspects of
       ecological and evolutionary biology.
       More about the journal

--
   Sustainable consumption and production, 13: Climate action, 14: Life
   below water, 15: Life on land, and 17: Partnerships for the goals, BMC
   Ecology and Evolution has launched this collection to bring together
   research on: · the development and implementation of sustainable
   agricultural practices that promote healthy ecosystems, · upscaling
--
   worlds. With recent technological advances, including new imaging and
   DNA sequencing techniques, researchers are providing an increasingly
   clear window to the past. BMC Ecology and Evolution has launched this
   Collection to attract papers from this multidisciplinary field. The
   Collection welcomes research: using micro- and macro fossils to study
--

   https://go.nature.co
   The origin and evolution of woolly rhinoceros in the view of ancient
   DNA

   communities.springernature.com

The origin and evolution of woolly rhinoceros in the view of ancient DNA

   Woolly rhinoceros is one of the most popular species of the Ice Age,
   which has been attracting great interests from both the scientific
   community and the public. In recent years, technical advances in
   ancient DNA have provided powerful tools for exploring the evolution of
   this extinct star species.
   This is a representation of how your post may appear on social media.
