
   Read our research on: Israel | Internet & Technology | Religion
   Home Research Topics Science Science Issues Evolution

   ReportFebruary 4, 2009

Darwin and His Theory of Evolution

   At first glance, Charles Darwin seems an unlikely revolutionary.
   Growing up a shy and unassuming member of a wealthy British family, he
   appeared, at least to his father, to be idle and directionless. But
--
   reflecting on his observations and experiences, and over the next two
   years developed the basic outline of his groundbreaking theory of
   evolution through natural selection. But beyond sharing his ideas with
   a close circle of scientist friends, Darwin told no one of his views on
   the origin and development of life. Indeed, he did not publish his
--
   naturalists, in London on July 1, 1858. The following year, Darwin
   published On the Origin of Species, a lengthy, fleshed-out treatment of
   his ideas on evolutionary theory. The book was an immediate bestseller
   and quickly set off a firestorm of controversy.

--
   life that has evolved from them.

   This evolution, Darwin wrote, is due to two factors. The first factor,
   Darwin argued, is that each individual animal is marked by subtle
   differences that distinguish it from its parents. Darwin, who called
--
   the scientific communities of the English-speaking world largely
   collapsed in the decades following the publication of On the Origin of
   Species. Yet evolution continued to be vigorously rejected by British
   and American churches because, religious leaders argued, the theory
   directly contradicted many of the core teachings of the Christian
--
   Darwinian thinking also appeared to contradict the notion, central to
   Christianity and many other faiths, that man had a special, God-given
   place in the natural order. Instead, proponents of evolution pointed to
   signs in human anatomy – remnants of a tailbone, for instance – showing
   common ancestry with other mammals.
--
   reportedly asked biologist Thomas Henry Huxley whether he was related
   to an ape on his grandmother’s or grandfather’s side. Huxley, whose
   vigorous defense of evolutionary theory would earn him the nickname
   “Darwin’s bulldog,” allegedly replied that he would rather be the
   ancestor of a monkey than an advanced and intelligent human being who
--
   occurred. Regardless, it was around this time that the British
   scientific establishment gained the upper hand in the debate over
   evolution. And while the public disagreement between ecclesiastical and
   scientific authorities did not end in the 1860s, religious thinkers
   became more wary of directly challenging evolution on scientific
   grounds. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, churches instead
   focused much of their energy on resisting the idea that man had evolved
   from lower animal orders and hence had no special place in creation or,
   for that matter, a soul. Indeed, while some churches, including the
   Catholic Church, eventually accepted evolution as a God-directed
   mechanism of biological development, none questioned the role of God as
   the sole creator of man.
--
   short reads | Feb 11, 2019

For Darwin Day, 6 facts about the evolution debate

   feature | Feb 6, 2019
--
Topics

   Evolution

MOST POPULAR
