                    # Biotechnology
                    # Ecology
                    # Evolution
                    # Genetics
                    # Microbiology
--
                    # Biotechnology
                    # Ecology
                    # Evolution
                    # Genetics
                    # Microbiology
--

   Original image file retrieved 2023 from Wikimedia Commons:
   https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Timeline_evolution_of_life.svg

8 Science Articles on Evolution

   Evolution is a cornerstone of middle and high school biology curricula,
   but it is sometimes hard to find clear and well-designed research
   examples that students can easily understand. This collection of
   adapted research articles provides students with approachable,
   empirical evidence of evolution at work in our world. Engage students
   with standards-matched adaptations, introductory video content,
   comprehension questions, and vocabulary to further your lesson
--
       representative sampling

2. Evolution in action: are voles shrinking?

   Abstract: It is not easy being small. Especially when nature seems to
--
   bigger? We studied a wild population of snow voles (a small rodent
   species) in their alpine habitat. Genetic analysis indicated a hidden
   evolutionary change: voles evolved to become smaller but the average
   body size of the population stayed the same. To understand the
   underlying causes, we separated genetic and environmental influences on
--
     * Scientific methods: climate scenarios, observation

4. What can fossils tell us about the nervous system’s evolution?

   Abstract: What can we learn from fossils? We can estimate the shape and
--
   makes them all the more interesting. Have you ever thought about how it
   is possible that some animals started to fly? How did they get their
   wings? The general answer is: evolution. But here the mystery deepens.
   For a long time it seemed like there was a huge evolutionary gap
   between pterosaurs and most other animals. How did they come about? By
   looking at fossils, we found out that lagerpetids [la-jer-pe-tids] (a
--
   This article is suitable for middle school and lower high school
   students. It includes an extensive Lesson Plan with slides about
   evolution.
     * Key terms: fossils, dinosaurs, reptiles, paleontology
     * Scientific figures: pictograph
--
   Sharks are hundreds of millions of years old. In fact, they are the
   oldest living group of jawed vertebrates! Because of this, we think
   they could help unlock important information about the evolution of
   sleep. We studied the metabolic rate and behavior of draughtsboard
   sharks (Cephaloscyllium isabellum) over a 24-hour period. Our results
--
   and a reduced metabolic rate. Our study supports the hypothesis that
   the conservation of energy is a core function of sleep. It also
   provides insight into its evolution.

   This article is available in both UPPER and LOWER reading levels, and
--

   Check out all of our articles on the topics:
     * Evolution
     * Natural Selection

   Or look at these excellent resources on teaching evolution:
     * Understanding Evolution Teaching Guide, University of California,
       Berkeley
     * “15 Evolutionary Gems,” Nature Education

   The featured image, “Timeline of the evolution of life,” was created by
   user LadyofHats and added to the Wikimedia Commons with Public Domain
   Dedication in 2012.
