   PMID: 35121666

Toward a theory of evolution as multilevel learning

   Vitaly Vanchurin,^ a ,^ b ,^ 1 Yuri I. Wolf,^ a Mikhail I. Katsnelson,^
--
Significance

   Modern evolutionary theory gives a detailed quantitative description of
   microevolutionary processes that occur within evolving populations of
   organisms, but evolutionary transitions and emergence of multiple
   levels of complexity remain poorly understood. Here, we establish the
   correspondence among the key features of evolution, learning dynamics,
   and renormalizability of physical theories to outline a theory of
   evolution that strives to incorporate all evolutionary processes within
   a unified mathematical framework of the theory of learning. According
   to this theory, for example, replication of genetic material and
--
   renormalizable physical theories.
   Keywords: theory of learning, loss function, natural selection, major
   evolutionary transitions, origin of life

Abstract

   We apply the theory of learning to physically renormalizable systems in
   an attempt to outline a theory of biological evolution, including the
   origin of life, as multilevel learning. We formulate seven fundamental
   principles of evolution that appear to be necessary and sufficient to
   render a universe observable and show that they entail the major
   features of biological evolution, including replication and natural
   selection. It is shown that these cornerstone phenomena of biology
   emerge from the fundamental features of learning dynamics such as the
   existence of a loss function, which is minimized during learning. We
   then sketch the theory of evolution using the mathematical framework of
   neural networks, which provides for detailed analysis of evolutionary
   phenomena. To demonstrate the potential of the proposed theoretical
   framework, we derive a generalized version of the Central Dogma of
   molecular biology by analyzing the flow of information during learning
   (back propagation) and predicting (forward propagation) the environment
   by evolving organisms. The more complex evolutionary phenomena, such as
   major transitions in evolution (in particular, the origin of life),
   have to be analyzed in the thermodynamic limit, which is described in
   detail in the paper by Vanchurin et al. [V. Vanchurin, Y. I. Wolf, E.
--
   What is life? If this question is asked in the scientific rather than
   in the philosophical context, a satisfactory answer should assume the
   form of a theoretical model of the origin and evolution of complex
   systems that are identified with life (1). NASA has operationally
   defined life as follows: “Life is a self-sustaining chemical system
   capable of Darwinian evolution” (2, 3). Apart from the insistence on
   chemistry, long-term evolution that involves (random) mutation,
   diversification, and adaptation is, indeed, an intrinsic, essential
   feature of life that is not apparent in any other natural phenomena.
--
   selection itself appears to be a complex rather than an elementary
   phenomenon (4). In all evolving organisms we are aware of, for natural
   selection to kick off and to sustain long-term evolution, an essential
   condition is replication of a complex digital information carrier (a
   DNA or RNA molecule). The replication fidelity must be sufficiently
--
   blocks for replication. Thus, the origin of life is a typical
   chicken-and-egg problem (or catch-22); accurate replication is
   essential for evolution, but the mechanisms ensuring replication
   fidelity are themselves products of complex evolutionary processes (6,
   7).

   Because genome replication that underlies natural selection is itself a
   product of evolution, origin of life has to be explained outside of the
   traditional framework of evolutionary biology. Modern evolutionary
   theory, steeped in population genetics, gives a detailed and arguably,
   largely satisfactory account of microevolutionary processes: that is,
   evolution of allele frequencies in a population of organisms under
   selection and random genetic drift (8, 9). However, this theory has
   little to say about the actual history of life, especially the
--
   processes on the planetary scale. All these distinct levels jointly
   constitute the hierarchical organization of the biosphere.
   Understanding the origin and evolution of this hierarchical complexity,
   arguably, is one of the principal goals of biology.

   In large part, evolution of the multilevel organization of biological
   systems appears to be driven by solving optimization problems, which
   entails conflicts or trade-offs between optimization criteria at
   different levels or scales, leading to frustrated states, in the
   language of physics (10–12). Two notable cases in point are
   parasite–host arms races that permeate biological evolution and makes
   major contributions to the diversity and complexity of life-forms
   (13–16) and multicellular organization of complex organisms, where the
--

   Two tightly linked but distinct fundamental concepts that lie
   effectively outside the canonical narrative of evolutionary biology
   address evolution of biological complexity: major transitions in
   evolution (MTEs) (19–21) and multilevel selection (MLS) (22–27). Each
   MTE involves the emergence of a new level of organization, often
   described as an evolutionary transition in individuality. A clear-cut
   example is the evolution of multicellularity, whereby a new level of
   selection emerges, namely selection among ensembles of cells rather
   than among individual cells. Multicellular life-forms (even counting
   only complex organisms with multiple cell types) evolved on many
   independent occasions during the evolution of life (28, 29), implying
   that emergence of new levels of complexity is a major evolutionary
   trend rather than a rare, chance event.

--
   formation and persistence of long-term memory: that is, history (31,
   32). By contrast, ergodic systems have no true history because they
   reach all possible states during their evolution (at least in the large
   time limit), and thus, the only content of quasihistory of such systems
   is the transition from less probable to more probable states for purely
--
   The origin of cells, which can and probably should be equated with the
   origin of life, was the first and most momentous transition at the
   onset of biological evolution, and as such, it is outside the purview
   of evolutionary biology sensu stricto. Arguably, the theoretical
   investigation of the origin of life can be feasible only within the
   framework of an envelope theory that would incorporate biological
   evolution as a special case. It is natural to envisage such a theory as
   encompassing all nonergodic processes occurring in the universe, of
   which life is a special case, emerging under conditions that remain to
   be investigated and defined.

   Here, in pursuit of a maximally general theory of evolution, we adopt
   the formalism of the theory of machine learning (35). Importantly,
   learning here is perceived in the maximally general sense as an
--
   (22, 37, 38). Here, we assess how far this analogy extends by
   establishing the correspondence between key features of biological
   evolution and concepts as well as the mathematical formalism of
   learning theory. We make the case that loss function, which is central
   to the learning theory, can be usefully and generally employed as the
   equivalent of the fitness function in the context of evolution. Our
   original motivation was to explain major features of biological
   evolution from more general principles of physics. However, after
   formulating such principles and embedding them within the mathematical
   framework of learning, we find that the theory can potentially apply to
--
   processes that have been taking place since the big bang and chemical
   processes that directly antedated and set the stage for the origin of
   life. The central propositions of the evolution theory outlined here
   include both key physical principles (namely, hierarchy of scale,
   frequency gaps, and renormalizability) (39, 40) and major features of
--
   variables are digitized and acquire the replication capacity, resulting
   in differential reproduction depending on the loss (fitness) function
   value, which is necessary and sufficient for the onset of evolution by
   natural selection. Subsequent evolution of life involves emergence of
   many additional scales, which correspond to MTE. Hereafter, we use the
   term “evolution” to describe temporal changes of living and lifelike
   and prebiotic systems (organisms), whereas the more general term
   “dynamics” refers to temporal processes in other physical systems.
--
   (41–43), but the nature of the involved emergent phenomena, to our
   knowledge, has not been clarified until very recently (36). Here, we
   outline a general approach to modeling and studying evolution as
   multilevel learning, supporting the view that a distinct type of
   physical theory, namely the theory of learning (35, 36), is necessary
   to investigate the evolution of complex objects in the universe, of
   which evolution of life is a specific, even if highly remarkable form.

1. Fundamental Principles of Evolution

   In this section, we attempt to formulate the minimal universal
   principles that define an observable universe, in which evolution is
   possible and perhaps, inevitable. Our analysis started from the major
   features of biological evolution discussed in the next section and
   proceeded toward the general principles. However, we begin the
   discussion with the latter for the sake of transparency and generality.
--
   What are the requirements for a universe to be observable? The
   possibility to make meaningful observations implies a degree of order
   and complexity in the observed universe emerging from evolutionary
   processes, and such evolvability itself seems to be predicated on
   several fundamental principles. It has to be emphasized that
--
   even inanimate systems endowed with the ability of feedback reaction.
   In this most general sense, observation is a prerequisite for
   evolution. We first formulate the basic principles underlying
   observability and evolvability and then, give the pertinent comments
   and explanations.
     * P1. Loss function. In any evolving system, there exists a loss
       function of time-dependent variables that is minimized during
       evolution.
     * P2. Hierarchy of scales. Evolving systems encompass multiple
       dynamical variables that change on different temporal scales (with
--

   The first principle (P1) is of special importance as the starting point
   for a formal description of evolution as a learning process. The very
   existence of a loss function implies that the dynamical system of the
   universe or simpler, the universe itself is a learning (evolving)
--
   efficient method is selection implemented in various stochastic
   algorithms (Markov Chain Monte Carlo, stochastic gradient descent,
   genetic algorithms, and more). All evolution can be perceived as an
   implementation of a stochastic learning algorithm as well. Put another
   way, learning is optimization by trial and error, and so is evolution.

   The remaining principles P2 to P7 provide sufficient conditions for
--
   limiting the number of relevant variables, constraining the complexity,
   and allowing for a coarse-grained description. This principle ensures a
   renormalizable universe capable of evolution and amenable to
   observation. Together, P2 to P4 define a universe, in which partial or
   approximate knowledge of the environment (in other words, coarse
--
   Principles P5, P6, and P7 endow evolving systems with the access to
   more advanced algorithms for learning and predicting the environment,
   paving the way for the evolution of complex systems, including
   eventually, life. These principles jointly underlie the emergence of
   the crucial phenomenon of selection (44, 45). In its simplest form,
--
   Generalized Central Dogma of Molecular Biology.

2. Fundamental Evolutionary Phenomena

   In this section, we link the fundamental principles of evolution P1 to
   P7 formulated above to the basic phenomenological features of life (E1
   to E10) and seek equivalencies in the theory of learning. The list
--
       replication of the carriers of slow-changing variables (P6), sets
       the stage for competition between evolving entities and for the
       onset of the ultimate evolutionary phenomenon, natural selection
       (E6).

--
       of frustrations and the fundamental impossibility of their
       resolution in a universally optimal manner are perpetual drivers of
       evolution and give rise to evolutionary transitions, attaining
       otherwise unreachable levels of complexity.

--
   structure of these systems (genes, genomes, cells, organisms, kin
   groups, populations, species, communities, and more) and the substrate
   the evolutionary forces act upon.
     * 1)
       Renormalizability of the universe (P4) implies that there is no
--
       was apparent to scholars from the earliest days of science.
       However, MLS was and remains a controversial subject in
       evolutionary biology (23, 26, 27). Intuitively and as implied by
       the Price equation (48), MLS should emerge in all evolving systems
       as long as the higher-level agency of selection possesses a
--
       particular, if organisms of a given species form populations that
       are sufficiently distinct genetically and interact competitively,
       population-level selection will ensue. Evolution of biological
       systems is driven by conflicting interactions (E2) that tend to
       lead to ever-increasing complexity (12). This trend further feeds
       the propensity of these systems to form new levels of organization
       and is associated with evolutionary transitions that involve the
       advent of new units of selection at multiple levels of complexity.
       Thus, E3 can be considered a major consequence of E2.
--
       The extant biological systems (cells, multicellular organisms, and
       higher-level entities, such as populations and communities) are
       products of about 4 billion y of the evolution of life, and as
       such, they are highly, albeit not completely, optimized. As a
       consequence, the typical distribution of the effects of heritable
       changes in biological evolution comprises numerous deleterious
       changes, comparatively rare beneficial changes and common neutral
       changes, and those with fitness effects below the noise level (50).
       The preponderance of neutral and slightly deleterious changes
       provides for evolution by genetic drift whereby a population moves
       on the same level or even slightly downward on the fitness
       landscape, potentially reaching another region of the landscape
--
       organization of the universe (P2). Frustrated dynamical systems are
       nonergodic, which from the biological perspective, means that, once
       separated, evolutionary trajectories diverge rather than converge.
       Because most of these trajectories traverse parts of the genotype
       space with comparable fitness values, competition rarely results in
--
       generates rich diversity.
     * 2)
       In terms of evolutionary biology, fitness landscapes are rugged,
       with multiple adaptive peaks of comparable fitness (53, 54), and a
       salient trend during evolution is the spread of life-forms across
       multiple peaks as opposed to concentrating on one or few. Evolution
       pushes evolving organisms to explore and occupy all available
       niches and try all possible strategies. In the context of machine
--
   update the genotype directly. The separation between the information
   storage and processing subsystems is a prerequisite for efficient
   evolution that probably emerged early on the path from prebiotic
   entities to the emergence of life.
     * 1)
--
     * 2)
       The emergence of the separation between phenotype and genotype is a
       crucial event in prebiotic evolution. This separation is prominent
       in all known as well as hypothetical life-forms. Even when the
       phenotype and genotype roles are fulfilled by chemically identical
       molecules, as in the RNA world scenario of primordial evolution
       (55, 56), their roles as effectors and information storage devices
       are sharply distinct. In biological terms, the split is between
--
       Information copying and sharing are beneficial only if the fidelity
       exceeds a certain threshold, sometimes called Eigen limit in
       evolutionary biology (5–7). Nevertheless, in primitive prebiotic
       systems, the required fidelity level could have been quite low
       (63). For instance, even a biased chemical composition of a
--
       and astonishingly, the only biosphere known to us represents an
       unbroken chain of genetic information transmission that spans about
       4 billion y, commensurate with the stellar evolution scale.

E8. Natural Selection.

   Evolution by natural selection (Darwinian evolution) arises from the
   combination of all the principles and phenomena described above. The
   necessary and sufficient conditions for Darwinian evolution to operate
   are 1) the existence of IPUs that are distinct from the environment and
   from each other (E1), 2) the dependence of the stability of an IPU on
--
   and transfer of information among IPUs, both vertically (to progeny)
   and horizontally. This process engenders the key feature of Darwinian
   evolution, differential reproduction of genotypes, based on the
   feedback from the environment transmitted through the phenotype.
     * 1)
       All seven fundamental principles of life-compatible universes (P1
       to P7) are involved in enabling evolution by natural selection. The
       very existence of units, on which selection can operate, hinges on
       self- vs. nonself-discrimination of prebiotic IPUs (E1) and the
--
       IPUs to replicate (P6) and expand their memory storage (genotype;
       P7, E6, and E7) provides them with access to hitherto unavailable
       degrees of freedom, making evolution an open-ended process rather
       than a quick, limited search for a local optimum.
     * 2)
       Evolution by natural selection is the central tenet of evolutionary
       biology and a key part of the NASA definition of life. An important
       note on definitions is due. We already referred to selection when
       discussing prebiotic evolution (E1); however, the term “natural
       (Darwinian) selection” is here reserved for the efficient form of
       selection that emerges with the replication of dedicated
--
       environmental resources, such competition inevitably arises, except
       in the unrealistic case of unlimited supply (44). With the onset of
       Darwinian evolution, the system can be considered to cross the
       threshold from prelife to life (64, 65). The evolutionary process
       is naturally represented by movement of an evolving IPU in a
       genotype space, where proximity is defined by similarity between
       distinct genotypes and transitions correspond to elementary
       evolutionary events: that is, mutations in the most general sense
       (66). For any given environment, fitness—that is, a measure of the
       ability of a genotype to produce viable offspring—can be defined
--
E9. Parasitism.

   Parasites and host–parasite coevolution are ubiquitous across
   biological systems at multiple levels of organization and are both
   intrinsic to and indispensable for the evolution of life.
     * 1)
       Due to the flexibility of life-compatible systems (P5 and P6) and
--
       selection (P4). In particular, if population-level or kin-level
       selection is sufficiently strong, mechanisms for altruistic death
       of individual organisms apparently can be fixed in evolution (70,
       71).
     * 2)
--
       (71–73).

   To conclude this section, which we titled “fundamental evolutionary
   phenomena,” deliberately omitting “biological,” it seems important to
   note that phenomena E1 to E7 are generic, applying to all learning
--

   In the previous sections, we formulated the seven fundamental
   principles of evolution P1 to P7 and then, argued that the key
   evolutionary phenomena E1 to E10 can be interpreted and analyzed in the
   context of these principles and apparently, derived from the latter.
   The next step is to formulate a mathematical framework that would be
   consistent with the fundamental principles and thus, would allow us to
   model evolutionary phenomena analytically or numerically. For
   concreteness, the proposed framework is based on a mathematical model
   of artificial neural networks (74, 75), but we first outline a general
   optimization approach in a form suitable for modeling biological
   evolution.

   We are interested in the broadest class of optimization problems, where
--
   stretchy="false">(</mo><mi mathvariant="bold-italic">c</mi><mo
   stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></msup></mrow> :MATH]
   compromise the entire learning (evolution) process: that is, result in
   a substantial increase of the loss function value; these variables
   correspond to deep minima of the loss function. When the basin of
--
   [MATH: <mi mathvariant="italic">τ</mi> :MATH]
   , and switching between scales is equivalent to switching between
   different frequencies or in the context of biological evolution,
   between different levels of organization. For any fixed
   [MATH: <mi mathvariant="italic">τ</mi> :MATH]
--

   As will become evident shortly, the separation of these three classes
   of variables and interactions between them are central to the evolution
   and selection on all levels of organization, resulting in pervasive
   multilevel learning and selection.
--
   environment changes or under the influence of other mutations, some of
   the neutral mutations can become beneficial [a genetic phenomenon known
   as epistasis, which is pervasive in evolution (78, 79)], and in their
   entirety, neutral mutations form the essential reservoir of variation
   available for adaptive evolution (80). Even which variables are
   classified as nontrainable
   [MATH: <mrow><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi
--

   Now that we described an optimization problem that is suitable for
   modeling evolution of organisms (or populations of organisms), we can
   construct a mathematical framework to solve such optimization problems.
   For this purpose, we employ a mathematical theory of artificial neural
   networks (74, 75), which is simple enough to perform calculations while
   being consistent with all of the fundamental principles (P1 to P7), and
   thus, it can be used for modeling evolutionary phenomena (E1 to E10).
   We first recall a general framework of the neural network theory.

--
   4.1 represents fast, often stochastic environmental changes and the
   corresponding fast reaction of organisms at the phenotype level,
   whereas [4.2] reflects slower-learning dynamics of evolutionary
   adaptation via changes in the intermediate, adaptable variables: that
   is, the variable portion of the genome. The main learning objective is
--
   the same as a generation comprising from about an hour to hundreds or
   even thousands of hours. However, fixation of mutations, which
   represents an evolutionarily stable change at the genome level,
   typically takes many generations and thus, always occurs orders of
   magnitude slower than phenotype changes. Accordingly, on this
--

   To specify a microscopic loss function that would be appropriate for
   describing evolution and thus, give a specific form to the fundamental
   principle P1, we first note that adaptation to the environment is more
   efficient (that is, the loss function value is smaller) for a learning
--
   the environment (84). In machine learning, boundary loss functions are
   most often used in the context of supervised learning (35), and in
   biological evolution, the “supervision” comes from the environment,
   which the evolving system, such as an organism or a population, is
   learning to predict.
--
   environments.

   In the context of biological evolution, Malthusian fitness
   [MATH: <mi mathvariant="italic">φ</mi> :MATH]
   is defined as the expected reproductive success of a given genotype:
--
   For a microscopic description of learning, the proportionality constant
   is unimportant, but as we argue in detail in the accompanying paper
   (86), in the description of the evolutionary process from the point of
   view of thermodynamics,
   [MATH: <mi>T</mi> :MATH]
   plays the role of “evolutionary temperature.”

   Given a concrete mathematical model of neural networks, one might
   wonder if all fundamental principles of evolution (P1 to P7) can be
   derived from this model. Such derivation would comprise additional
   evidence supporting the claim that the entire universe can be
--
   trainable variables (87). Additional gaps between levels of
   organization are also expected to appear through phase transitions as
   becomes apparent in the thermodynamic description of evolution we
   develop in the accompanying paper (86). Renormalizability (P4) is a
   direct consequence of the second law of learning (35), according to
--
   the fast-changing variables runs faster, the slow-changing variables
   can take advantage of the fast-changing ones to accelerate computation,
   which would be rewarded by evolution. The flow of information between
   slow-changing and fast-changing variables in the opposite direction is
   also beneficial because the fast-changing variables can use the
--

   Thus, the meaning of the generalized Central Dogma from the point of
   view of the learning theory—and our theory of evolution—is that slow
   dynamics (that is, evolution on a long timescale) should be mostly
   independent of the fast variables. In less formal terms, slow variables
   determine the rules of the game, and changing these rules depending on
--
7. Discussion

   In this work, we outline a theory of evolution on the basis of the
   theory of learning. The parallel between learning and biological
   evolution becomes obvious as soon as the mapping between the loss
   function and the fitness function is established (Eq. 4.6). Indeed,
   both processes represent movement of an evolving (learning) system on a
--
   and downward moves also occur occasionally. However, we go beyond the
   obvious analogy and trace a detailed correspondence between the
   essential features of the evolutionary and learning processes.
   Arguably, the most important fundamental commonality between evolution
   and learning is the stratification of the trainable variables (degrees
   of freedom) into classes that differ by the rate of change. At least in
   complex environments, all learning is multilevel, and so is all
   selection that is relevant for the evolutionary process. The framework
   of evolution as learning developed here implies that evolution of
   biological complexity would be impossible without MLS permeating the
   entire history of life. Under this perspective, emergence of new levels
   of organization, in learning and in evolution, and in particular, MTE
   represent genuine phase transitions as previously suggested (41). Such
   transitions can be analyzed consistently only in the thermodynamic
--
   that are too shallow to account for long-term memory that is central to
   biology (12, 41). Thus, some generalization of the spin glass concept
   is likely to be required for productive application in evolutionary
   biology (95).

--

   A fundamental shortcoming of all these approaches is that they do not
   include, at least not as a major component, evolutionary concepts, such
   as natural selection. The framework of learning theory used here allows
   us to naturally unify the descriptions of physical and biological
--

   The detailed correspondence between the key features of the processes
   of learning and biological evolution implies that this is not a simple
   analogy but rather, a reflection of the deep unity of evolutionary
   processes occurring in the universe. Indeed, separation of the relevant
   degrees of freedom into multiple temporal classes is ubiquitous in the
--
   Furthermore, scale separation and renormalizability appear to be
   essential conditions for a universe to be observable. According to the
   evolution theory outlined here, any observable universe consists of
   systems that undergo learning or synonymously, adaptive evolution, and
   actually, the universe itself is such a system (36). The famous dictum
   of Dobzhansky (98), thus, can and arguably should be rephrased as
--
   learning.”

   Within the theory of evolution outlined here, the difference between
   life and nonliving systems, however important, can be considered as one
   in the type and degree of optimization, so that all evolutionary
   phenomena can be described within the same formal framework of the
   theory of learning. Crucially, any complex optimization problem can be
--
   (genomes) that carry information on the operation of reproducers within
   which they reside (99). This is also the point when natural (Darwinian)
   selection takes off (64). Our theory of evolution implies that this
   pivotal stage was preceded by evolution of “prelife,” which comprised
   reproducers that lacked genomes but nevertheless, were learning systems
   that were subject to selection for persistence. Self-reproducing
--
   subsequently, under selection for the ability to store, express, and
   share information essential for the entire system. This key step
   greatly increased the efficiency of evolution/learning and provided for
   long-term memory that persisted throughout the history of life,
   enabling the onset of natural selection and the unprecedented
   diversification of life-forms (E5). It has to be emphasized that,
   compared with the existing evolutionary models that explore replicator
   dynamics, the learning approach described here is more microscopic in
   that the existence of replicators is not initially assumed but rather,
--
   information sharing, which in the biological context, corresponds to
   horizontal gene transfer. The essentiality of horizontal gene transfer
   at the earliest stages of life evolution is perceived as the cause of
   the universality of the translation machinery and genetic code in all
   known life-forms (101). The conceptual model of the origin of life
   implied by our learning-based theoretical framework appears to be fully
   compatible with Gánti’s chemoton, a model of protocell emergence and
   evolution based on autocatalytic reaction networks (102–104).

   The origin of life scenario within the encompassing framework of the
   present evolution theory, even if formulated in most general terms,
   implies that emergence of complexity commensurate with life is a
   general trend in the evolution of complex systems. At face value, this
   conclusion might seem to be at odds with the magnitude of
   complexification involved in the origin of life [suffice it to consider
--

   Evidently, the analysis presented here and in the accompanying paper
   (86) is only an outline of a theory of evolution as learning. The
   details and implications, including directly testable ones, remain to
   be worked out.
--
References

   1. Morange M., The recent evolution of the question “What is life”?
   Hist. Philos. Life Sci. 34, 425–436 (2012). [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   2. Benner S. A., Defining life. Astrobiology 10, 1021–1030 (2010). [PMC
--
   [Google Scholar]
   4. Koonin E. V., The Logic of Chance: The Nature and Origin of
   Biological Evolution (FT Press, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2011). [Google
   Scholar]
   5. Eigen M., Selforganization of matter and the evolution of biological
   macromolecules. Naturwissenschaften 58, 465–523 (1971). [PubMed]
   [Google Scholar]
--
   9. Lynch M., The Origins of Genome Architecture (Sinauer Associates,
   Sunderland, MA, 2007). [Google Scholar]
   10. Bernardes J. P., et al., The evolution of convex trade-offs enables
   the transition towards multicellularity. Nat. Commun. 12, 4222 (2021).
   [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   11. Michod R. E., The group covariance effect and fitness trade-offs
   during evolutionary transitions in individuality. Proc. Natl. Acad.
   Sci. U.S.A. 103, 9113–9117 (2006). [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google
   Scholar]
--
   13. Forterre P., Prangishvili D., The great billion-year war between
   ribosome- and capsid-encoding organisms (cells and viruses) as the
   major source of evolutionary novelties. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1178,
   65–77 (2009). [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   14. Koonin E. V., Viruses and mobile elements as drivers of
   evolutionary transitions. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci.
   371, 20150442 (2016). [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   15. Koonin E. V., Makarova K. S., Wolf Y. I., Krupovic M., Evolutionary
   entanglement of mobile genetic elements and host defence systems: Guns
   for hire. Nat. Rev. Genet. 21, 119–131 (2020). [PubMed] [Google
--
   tumors. Curr. Pathobiol. Rep. 6, 201–207 (2018). [PMC free article]
   [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   19. Szathmáry E., Smith J. M., The major evolutionary transitions.
   Nature 374, 227–232 (1995). [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   20. Maynard Smith J., Szathmary E., The Major Transitions in Evolution
   (Oxford University Press, Oxford, United Kingdom, 1997). [Google
   Scholar]
   21. Szathmáry E., Toward major evolutionary transitions theory 2.0.
   Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 10104–10111 (2015). [PMC free
   article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
--
   learning. R. Soc. Open Sci. 6, 190202 (2019). [PMC free article]
   [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   23. Okashi S., Evolution and the Levels of Selection (Oxford University
   Press, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2006). [Google Scholar]
   24. Brunet T. D., Doolittle W. F., Multilevel selection theory and the
   evolutionary functions of transposable elements. Genome Biol. Evol. 7,
   2445–2457 (2015). [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   25. Gardner A., The genetical theory of multilevel selection. J. Evol.
--
   world. Nature 463, E8–E9 (2010). [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google
   Scholar]
   28. Márquez-Zacarías P., et al., Evolution of cellular differentiation:
   From hypotheses to models. Trends Ecol. Evol. 36, 49–60 (2021).
   [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
--
   [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   30. Kramer J., Meunier J., Kin and multilevel selection in social
   evolution: A never-ending controversy? F1000 Res. 5, 5 (2016). [PMC
   free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   31. Edwards S. F., Anderson P. W., Theory of spin glasses. J. Phys. F
--
   32. Fischer K. H., Hertz J. A., Spin Glasses (Cambridge University
   Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 1993). [Google Scholar]
   33. McLeish T. C., Are there ergodic limits to evolution? Ergodic
   exploration of genome space and convergence. Interface Focus 5,
   20150041 (2015). [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
--
   Learning and Prospering in a Complex World (Basic Books, New York, NY,
   ed. 1, 2013). [Google Scholar]
   38. Watson R. A., Szathmáry E., How can evolution learn? Trends Ecol.
   Evol. 31, 147–157 (2016). [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   39. Benfatto G., Gallavotti G., Renormalization Group (Physics Notes
--
   NY, 1972). [Google Scholar]
   41. Katsnelson M. I., Wolf Y. I., Koonin E. V., Towards physical
   principles of biological evolution. Phys. Scr. 93, 043001 (2018).
   [Google Scholar]
   42. Laughlin R. B., Pines D., The theory of everything. Proc. Natl.
--
   Scholar]
   48. Shelton D. E., Michod R. E., Group and individual selection during
   evolutionary transitions in individuality: Meanings and partitions.
   Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 375, 20190364 (2020). [PMC
   free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   49. Bakhtin Y., Katsnelson M. I., Wolf Y. I., Koonin E. V., Evolution
   in the weak-mutation limit: Stasis periods punctuated by fast
   transitions between saddle points on the fitness landscape. Proc. Natl.
--
   [Google Scholar]
   50. Koonin E. V., Wolf Y. I., Constraints and plasticity in genome and
   molecular-phenome evolution. Nat. Rev. Genet. 11, 487–498 (2010). [PMC
   free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   51. Wright S., Adaptation and Selection. Genetics, Paleontology and
   Evolution (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1949). [Google
   Scholar]
   52. Lynch M., et al., Genetic drift, selection and the evolution of the
   mutation rate. Nat. Rev. Genet. 17, 704–714 (2016). [PubMed] [Google
   Scholar]
   53. Gavrilets S., Fitness Landscapes and the Origin of Species
   (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2004). [Google Scholar]
   54. Svensson E., Calsbeek R., The Adaptive Landscape in Evolutionary
   Biology (Oxford University Press, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2012).
   [Google Scholar]
   55. Joyce G. F., The antiquity of RNA-based evolution. Nature 418,
   214–221 (2002). [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   56. Joyce G. F., Szostak J. W., Protocells and RNA self-replication.
   Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 10, a034801 (2018). [PMC free
   article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   57. Szathmáry E., The evolution of replicators. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
   Lond. B Biol. Sci. 355, 1669–1676 (2000). [PMC free article] [PubMed]
   [Google Scholar]
--
   64. Woese C., The universal ancestor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 95,
   6854–6859 (1998). [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   65. Woese C. R., On the evolution of cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
   U.S.A. 99, 8742–8747 (2002). [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google
   Scholar]
--
   68. Sagan L., On the origin of mitosing cells. J. Theor. Biol. 14,
   255–274 (1967). [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   69. Embley T. M., Martin W., Eukaryotic evolution, changes and
   challenges. Nature 440, 623–630 (2006). [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   70. Iranzo J., Lobkovsky A. E., Wolf Y. I., Koonin E. V., Virus-host
--
   71. Nedelcu A. M., Driscoll W. W., Durand P. M., Herron M. D., Rashidi
   A., On the paradigm of altruistic suicide in the unicellular world.
   Evolution 65, 3–20 (2011). [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   72. Durand P. M., The Evolutionary Origins of Life and Death
   (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 2021). [Google Scholar]
   73. Koonin E. V., Aravind L., Origin and evolution of eukaryotic
   apoptosis: The bacterial connection. Cell Death Differ. 9, 394–404
   (2002). [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
--
   75. Galushkin A. I., Neural Networks Theory (Springer, New York, NY,
   2007). [Google Scholar]
   76. Kimura M., The Neutral Theory of Molecular Evolution (Cambridge
   University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 1983). [Google Scholar]
   77. Nei M., Selectionism and neutralism in molecular evolution. Mol.
   Biol. Evol. 22, 2318–2342 (2005). [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google
   Scholar]
--
   model of a complex trait. eLife 10, e64740 (2021). [PMC free article]
   [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   79. Sailer Z. R., Harms M. J., Molecular ensembles make evolution
   unpredictable. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 114, 11938–11943 (2017).
   [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
--
   transcription initiation in bacteria. Nat. Rev. Genet. 21, 699–714
   (2020). [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   83. Lynch M., Evolution of the mutation rate. Trends Genet. 26, 345–352
   (2010). [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   84. Friston K., Kilner J., Harrison L., A free energy principle for the
--
   (Harper and Row, New York, NY, 1970). [Google Scholar]
   86. Vanchurin V., Wolf Y. I., Koonin E. V., Katsnelson M. I.,
   Thermodynamics of evolution and the origin of life. Proc. Natl. Acad.
   Sci. U.S.A. 119, 10.1073/pnas.2120042119 (2022). [PMC free article]
   [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
--
   [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   98. Dobzhansky T., Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light
   of evolution. Am. Biol. Teach. 35, 125–129 (1973). [Google Scholar]
   99. Copley S. D., Smith E., Morowitz H. J., The origin of the RNA
   world: Co-evolution of genes and metabolism. Bioorg. Chem. 35, 430–443
   (2007). [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
   100. Kahana A., Lancet D., Self-reproducing catalytic micelles as
   nanoscopic protocell precursors. Nat. Rev. Chem. 5, 870–878 (2021).
   [Google Scholar]
   101. Vetsigian K., Woese C., Goldenfeld N., Collective evolution and
   the genetic code. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103, 10696–10701
   (2006). [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
