    1. Home
    2. Biology
    3. Evolution

    1. Home
--
   proofread

Evolution might stop humans from solving climate change, researchers say

   by Marcus Wolf, University of Maine
   Evolution might stop humans from solving climate change, says new study
   Dimensions of environmental management create an attractor landscape
   for long-term human evolution. Environmental sustainability challenges
   (curved frontiers) require a minimum level of cooperation in a society
   of a certain minimum spatial size. Alternative potential paths move
   humanity toward different long-term evolutionary outcomes. In path B,
   competition between societies over common environmental resources
   creates cultural selection between groups for increasingly direct
--
   Society B: Biological Sciences (2023). DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2022.0259

   Central features of human evolution may stop our species from resolving
   global environmental problems like climate change, says a recent study
   led by the University of Maine.
--
   exploit natural resources that were refined over thousands of years
   through the process of cultural adaptation to the environment.
   University of Maine evolutionary biologist Tim Waring wanted to know
   how this process of cultural adaptation to the environment might
   influence the goal of solving global environmental problems. What he
--

   The project sought to understand three core questions: how human
   evolution has operated in the context of environmental resources, how
   human evolution has contributed to the multiple global environmental
   crises, and how global environmental limits might change the outcomes
   of human evolution in the future.

   Waring's team outlined their findings in a new paper published in
--

   The study explored how human societies' use of the environment changed
   over our evolutionary history. The research team investigated changes
   in the ecological niche of human populations, including factors such as
   the natural resources they used, how intensively they were used, what
--
   social systems for managing each of these.

   "Human evolution is mostly driven by cultural change, which is faster
   than genetic evolution. That greater speed of adaptation has made it
   possible for humans to colonize all habitable land worldwide," says
   Waring, associate professor with the UMaine Senator George J. Mitchell
--
   societies, not between them. For example, managing regional water
   systems requires regional cooperation, regional infrastructure and
   technology, and these arise through regional cultural evolution. The
   presence of societies of the right scale is therefore a critical
   limiting factor.
--

   The other problem is much worse, Waring says. In a world filled with
   sub-global groups, cultural evolution among these groups will tend to
   solve the wrong problems, benefiting the interests of nations and
   corporations and delaying action on shared priorities. Cultural
   evolution among groups would tend to exacerbate resource competition
   and could lead to direct conflict between groups and even global human
   dieback.
--
   solve than previously considered," says Waring. "It's not just that
   they are the hardest thing our species has ever done. They absolutely
   are. The bigger problem is that central features in human evolution are
   likely working against our ability to solve them. To solve global
   collective challenges we have to swim upstream."
--

   Waring and his colleagues think that their analysis can help navigate
   the future of human evolution on a limited Earth. Their paper is the
   first to propose that human evolution may oppose the emergence of
   collective global problems and further research is needed to develop
   and test this theory.

   Waring's team proposes several applied research efforts to better
   understand the drivers of cultural evolution and search for ways to
   reduce global environmental competition, given how human evolution
   works. For example, research is needed to document the patterns and
   strength of human cultural evolution in the past and present. Studies
   could focus on the past processes that lead to the human domination of
   the biosphere, and on the ways cultural adaptation to the environment
   is occurring today.

   But if the general outline proves to be correct, and human evolution
   tends to oppose collective solutions to global environmental problems,
   as the authors suggest, then some very pressing questions need to be
--
   As for whether humans can continue to survive on a limited planet,
   Waring says, "We don't have any solutions for this idea of a long-term
   evolutionary trap, as we barely understand the problem. If our
   conclusions are even close to being correct, we need to study this much
   more carefully."

   More information: Timothy M. Waring et al, Characteristic processes of
   human evolution caused the Anthropocene and may obstruct its global
   solutions, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:
   Biological Sciences (2023). DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2022.0259
--

   Provided by University of Maine
   Citation: Evolution might stop humans from solving climate change,
   researchers say (2024, January 2) retrieved 3 January 2024 from
   https://phys.org/news/2024-01-evolution-humans-climate.html
   This document is subject to copyright. Apart from any fair dealing for
   the purpose of private study or research, no part may be reproduced
--
       Oct 30, 2023

Researchers: Culture drives human evolution more than genetics
       Jun 3, 2021

--
       Dec 18, 2017

New research maps 14 potential evolutionary dead ends for humanity and ways
to avoid them
       Nov 13, 2023
--
       21 hours ago

Unraveling the evolutionary origins of umami and sweet taste preferences
       Dec 29, 2023

   IFRAME:
   //js.trendmd.com/trendmd.amp.html?title=Evolution%20might%20stop%20huma
   ns%20from%20solving%20climate%20change%2C%20researchers%20say&url=https
   %3A%2F%2Fphys.org%2Fnews%2F2024-01-evolution-humans-climate.html&journa
   lId=62675

--
E-mail the story

Evolution might stop humans from solving climate change, researchers say

   (BUTTON)
