IDEA SET

Evolution: Changing Species Over Time

Evolution: Changing Species Over Time

   Evolution is the process by which species adapt over time in response
   to their changing environment. Use these ideas to teach about the water
   cycle in your classroom.
--
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON)

   Evolution is an important field of study for scientists. It covers the
   study of changes organisms have undergone over time in response to
   different factors in their environment. All organisms, including
   humans, evolve over time. Evolution occurs through natural selection,
   and is a force that has shaped every organism living today.
   When developing his theory of evolution and the concept of natural
   selection, Charles Darwin studied the species of finches in the
   Galapagos Islands and hypothesized that they all originated from a
--
   quickly to survive the stresses of a warming planet.

National Geographic Explorer Jingchun Li: Evolution of “Living Solar Panels”

   The first thing you notice when visiting a healthy marine coral reef is
--
   marine biodiversity and biologically productive coral reef ecosystems.
   Li is studying how coral reefs and other organisms are undergoing
   macroevolution to cope with the stresses created by human disturbances
   to their ecosystem.

--
   to the skulls of modern humans.

Human Evolution

   Scientists who study early humans depend on fossil evidence to help
--
   fossils, scientists look for clues to changes in different
   characteristics such as brain size, skull shape, locomotion, and jaw
   size. Have the students learn about human evolution, then have them
   work through the Mystery Skull Interactive to use clues to identify
   fossils.
--
   Papua New Guinea.

Evolution in Isolation

   Have the students watch the video about the birds living on the island
--
   better understand how crocodiles have evolved over millions of years.

National Geographic Explorer Jeremy Emiland Martin: Evolution of Crocodiles

   Have the students read about Jeremy Emiland Martin’s work on the
   evolution of crocodiles and then have them research how modern
   crocodiles have been evolving since the time of the dinosaurs. Because
   crocodiles are found in so many different areas of the world, it is
   important to go back to where they first emerged to learn about their
   evolutionary beginnings. Ask the students, how have crocodiles evolved
   since the Cretaceous Period? What might have caused crocodiles to
   evolve? Why were these traits favorable in this particular environment?
