   Education
   Sign In
   (BUTTON) Menu
   Donate

ENCYCLOPEDIC ENTRY

ENCYCLOPEDIC ENTRY

Artificial Selection

Artificial Selection

   Artificial selection is the identification by humans of desirable
   traits in plants and animals, and the steps taken to enhance and
   perpetuate those traits in future generations. Artificial selection
   works the same way as natural selection, except that with natural
   selection it is nature, not human interference, that makes these
   decisions.

Grades

   5 - 8

Subjects

   Biology, Genetics, Geography

   Image

pigeons

   Like many animals kept in human captivity, mating pairs of pigeons are
   often paired together based on their genetics to achieve the most
   desirable traits in their offspring.

     Photograph by Mark Thiessen

   Like many animals kept in human captivity, mating pairs of pigeons are
   often paired together based on their genetics to achieve the most
   desirable traits in their offspring.
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON) Article (BUTTON) Vocabulary

   In laying out the evidence for his theory of evolution by natural
   selection in his 1859 book, On the Origin of Species, the British
   naturalist and biologist Charles Darwin highlighted the physical traits
   and behaviors of several species of bird called finches. During a
   voyage in the 1830s, Darwin had observed these birds on the Galápagos
   Islands, a group of islands in the Pacific Ocean west of South America.

   Sometimes summed up by the phrase “survival of the fittest,” natural
   selection is based on the following principles: In nature, organisms
   produce more offspring than are able to survive and reproduce.
   Offspring with traits that make them more likely to survive, mature,
   and reproduce in the environment they inhabit pass on their traits to
   the next generation.

   As this happens generation after generation, natural selection acts as
   a kind of sieve, or a remover of undesirable traits. Organisms
   therefore gradually become better-suited for their environment. If the
   environment changes, natural selection will then push organisms to
   evolve in a different direction to adapt to their new circumstances.

   How does this relate to finches? On the Galápagos Islands, some finches
   appeared so different from others that Darwin did not realize at first
   that they were all finches. In fact, they were different species of
   finches with a variety of traits. Some finches, for instance, had long,
   narrow beaks, while others had short, thick beaks. Darwin concluded
   that the traits of the different populations of finches had changed
   over time, and that these variations were related to different
   environments in the islands. Each type of beak had evolved for a
   specific task. Where there was a large supply of seeds on the ground,
   for instance, short-beaked finches became more common, because these
   beaks were better at cracking open the seeds. Where cactus plants were
   more common, finches developed long, narrow beaks to extract pollen and
   nectar from cactus flowers.

   Darwin’s finches constituted powerful evidence for natural selection.
   But Darwin was also inspired greatly by the evolution that he saw in
   the traits of pigeons, not due to natural selection but rather
   artificial selection. Breeding pigeons was a popular hobby in England
   in Darwin’s time. By selecting which pigeons were allowed to mate,
   people had a profound effect on their appearance, such as the shape and
   size of their beaks and the color of their feathers.

   Dog breeding is another prime example of artificial selection. Although
   all dogs are descendants of the wolf, the use of artificial selection
   has allowed humans to drastically alter the appearance of dogs. For
   centuries, dogs have been bred for various desired characteristics,
   leading to the creation of a wide range of dogs, from the tiny
   Chihuahua to the massive Great Dane.

   Artificial selection has long been used in agriculture to produce
   animals and crops with desirable traits. The meats sold today are the
   result of the selective breeding of chickens, cattle, sheep, and pigs.
   Many fruits and vegetables have been improved or even created through
   artificial selection. For example, broccoli, cauliflower, and cabbage
   were all derived from the wild mustard plant through selective
   breeding. Artificial selection appeals to humans since it is faster
   than natural selection and allows humans to mold organisms to their
   needs.

Credits

Media Credits

   The audio, illustrations, photos, and videos are credited beneath the
   media asset, except for promotional images, which generally link to
   another page that contains the media credit. The Rights Holder for
   media is the person or group credited.

Director

   Tyson Brown, National Geographic Society

Author

   National Geographic Society

Production Managers

   Gina Borgia, National Geographic Society
   Jeanna Sullivan, National Geographic Society

Program Specialists

   Sarah Appleton, National Geographic Society, National Geographic
   Society
   Margot Willis, National Geographic Society

other

Last Updated

   October 19, 2023

User Permissions

   For information on user permissions, please read our Terms of Service.
   If you have questions about how to cite anything on our website in your
   project or classroom presentation, please contact your teacher. They
   will best know the preferred format. When you reach out to them, you
   will need the page title, URL, and the date you accessed the resource.

Media

   If a media asset is downloadable, a download button appears in the
   corner of the media viewer. If no button appears, you cannot download
   or save the media.

Text

   Text on this page is printable and can be used according to our Terms
   of Service.

Interactives

   Any interactives on this page can only be played while you are visiting
   our website. You cannot download interactives.

Related Resources

   National Geographic Headquarters
   1145 17th Street NW
   Washington, DC 20036

ABOUT

   National Geographic SocietyNatGeo.comNews and ImpactContact Us

Explore

   Our ExplorersOur ProgramsEducationNat Geo LiveStorytellers
   CollectiveTraveling Exhibitions

Join Us

   Ways to GiveApply for a GrantCareers
   donate
   get updates

Connect

   National Geographic Society is a 501 (c)(3) organization. © 1996 - 2024
   National Geographic Society. All rights reserved.
   Privacy Notice|Sustainability Policy|Terms of Service|Code of Ethics
