   Education
   Sign In
   (BUTTON) Menu
   Donate

INFOGRAPHIC

INFOGRAPHIC

Evolving Theory of Evolution

Evolving Theory of Evolution

   Charles Darwin and Alfred Wallace developed the idea of evolution
   through natural selection. But this idea was not accepted by scientists
   until more evidence came along. Use this infographic to explore how
   Darwinism and genetics came together to explain what we know today
   about evolution.

Grades

   5 - 8

Subjects

   Biology, Genetics
   ‌
   ‌
   ‌
   ‌
   ‌
   ‌
   ‌
   ‌
   ‌
   ‌
   ‌
   ‌
   ‌
   ‌
   NGS Resource Carousel Loading Logo

Loading ...

   (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON) Background Info (BUTTON) Vocabulary

   Idea for Use in the Classroom

   Introduce and share the infographic with students. Define key ideas
   such as natural selection, inheritance, and DNA. These activities can
   be done as in-class assignments, small group work, or they can be
   completed outside of class time. Introduce students to Charles Darwin’s
   research, Gregor Mendel’s work with pea plants, and James Watson and
   Francis Crick’s determination of the structure of DNA.

   Darwin Challenged

   Have students work in pairs to research the scientists and ideas that
   were used to challenge Darwin’s theory about the role of natural
   selection. Ask the pairs to choose one scientist or idea and make a
   poster that explains why that scientist thinks Darwin is wrong. Then
   have students write a response from Charles Darwin explaining why his
   theory of natural selection is correct.

   Lucy

   Have students search to find a tree of life diagram of human evolution.
   Ask students to identify where “Lucy” fits into the tree. Then ask
   students to research Lucy and write a short paragraph describing why
   she is an important find.

   Darwin’s Finches

   Have students work in groups to research the finches Darwin studied in
   the Galapagos. Have the groups select one type of finch and explain how
   its beak adapted through natural selection to gather its food.
   Encourage the groups to build models to demonstrate how the shape of
   the beak is best suited for obtaining certain types of food. Have the
   groups present their demonstration to the class.

   Tweeting Science

   Ask students to read through the timeline and select one of the
   entries. Then have them research that entry to learn more about how the
   discovery came about and what it adds to our understanding of
   evolution. After research, have students summarize how the entry
   supports the legacy of an idea by writing a 280-character tweet that
   announces the evidence.

   Natural Selection

   Tell students that Darwin, along with another scientist, Alfred Russel
   Wallace, were the first to propose the idea of evolution through
   natural selection. Today, this idea is widely accepted by scientists.
   Have students research and devise a demonstration of how natural
   selection works in plants or animals. Have students select a
   demonstration that they can present to the class.

Credits

Media Credits

   The audio, illustrations, photos, and videos are credited beneath the
   media asset, except for promotional images, which generally link to
   another page that contains the media credit. The Rights Holder for
   media is the person or group credited.

Director

   Tyson Brown, National Geographic Society

Author

   National Geographic Society

Production Managers

   Gina Borgia, National Geographic Society
   Jeanna Sullivan, National Geographic Society

Program Specialists

   Sarah Appleton, National Geographic Society, National Geographic
   Society
   Margot Willis, National Geographic Society

other

Last Updated

   October 19, 2023

User Permissions

   For information on user permissions, please read our Terms of Service.
   If you have questions about how to cite anything on our website in your
   project or classroom presentation, please contact your teacher. They
   will best know the preferred format. When you reach out to them, you
   will need the page title, URL, and the date you accessed the resource.

Media

   If a media asset is downloadable, a download button appears in the
   corner of the media viewer. If no button appears, you cannot download
   or save the media.

Text

   Text on this page is printable and can be used according to our Terms
   of Service.

Interactives

   Any interactives on this page can only be played while you are visiting
   our website. You cannot download interactives.

Related Resources

   National Geographic Headquarters
   1145 17th Street NW
   Washington, DC 20036

ABOUT

   National Geographic SocietyNatGeo.comNews and ImpactContact Us

Explore

   Our ExplorersOur ProgramsEducationNat Geo LiveStorytellers
   CollectiveTraveling Exhibitions

Join Us

   Ways to GiveApply for a GrantCareers
   donate
   get updates

Connect

   National Geographic Society is a 501 (c)(3) organization. © 1996 - 2024
   National Geographic Society. All rights reserved.
   Privacy Notice|Sustainability Policy|Terms of Service|Code of Ethics
