   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-PL4DTG5

   Internet Explorer is no longer supported. Try downloading another
   browser like Chrome or Firefox.

     * Cart
     * Account
     * United States United States / English
     *

   If you already have an account, Sign in.
   View Cart
   United States United States / English
     * Answers
     * Store
     * Events
     * Media
     * Kids
     * Education
     * Donate

   Evolution
     * Answers in Genesis
     * Answers
     * Evolution

Evolution

   Share
   (BUTTON)

   What is “evolution,” and how does it relate to creation? Discover how
   evolution supposedly works, its history, myths, and effect on Christian
   theology.
   Check This Out: Evolution Refuted

   From Check This Out

   Biological evolution is the supposed process by which the first cell
   evolved into the diversity of life we see today. Natural selection and
   mutations are considered its driving force; however, evolution has
   never been observed despite numerous protestations to the contrary.
   Natural selection and mutations cannot add the information necessary to
   change one kind of organism into another. And it doesn’t take a science
   degree to understand why molecules-to-man evolution is impossible.

Contents

     * Evolution Defined: “Macro vs. Micro” Evolution
     * History of Evolution: Charles Darwin and Others
     * Evolutionary Thought Since Darwin
     * The Genetic Challenge to Classic Darwinian Evolution
     * How Mutations Work in Real Life
     * The Origin of Life in Darwinian Evolution
     * The Fossil Record Problem for Evolution
     * Evolution’s Effects on Christian Theology
     * Evolution and the Flood
     * Evolution Requires Faith
     * Myths About Evolution
     * Life-Changing Answers for Evolutionists

Evolution Defined: “Macro vs. Micro” Evolution

   Evolution is a word that is used a lot but is poorly defined.
   Evolutionists themselves frequently equivocate on the term, using it to
   mean multiple things, sometimes even within the same sentence.

   “Macroevolution” is used to describe the large-scale changes believed
   to be able to turn a blob of protoplasm into a person. By contrast,
   “microevolution” is intended to describe the small-scale changes in
   populations, such as those exhibited by Darwin’s finches—the finch
   populations change beak sizes regularly in response to environmental
   pressures. However, they remain finches. No new traits or major changes
   take place.

   Since the term evolution is so strongly associated with the
   particles-to-people myth, we tend to use the word speciation to explain
   adaptation and variation within the created kinds, such as that
   exhibited by the finches.Because the small-scale changes generally lead
   to a loss of genetic information rather than a gain of new information
   needed to create new traits like arms and eyes, microevolution can
   never lead to macroevolution. Evolutionists tend to use these ideas
   interchangeably. For this reason, we avoid those terms, preferring to
   speak of speciation within created kinds (which we can observe and
   verify) and molecules-to-man evolution (which is unobservable and
   unverifiable).
   History Of Evolution

History of Evolution: Charles Darwin and Others

   Many people believe that evolution began with Charles Darwin in 1859.
   This belief, however, is inaccurate. Evolution as an idea has existed
   since at least the Greek philosophers. A Frenchman named Jean-Baptiste
   Lamarck had proposed a form of evolution in the early 1800s. In fact,
   Darwin’s grandfather, Erasmus Darwin, engraved a Latin motto on his
   coach and book plates meaning “Everything from Shells,” indicating his
   belief in evolution.

   Darwin built on past ideas and added his own wrinkle, one he borrowed
   from creationist Edward Blyth. Darwin observed that farmers could breed
   all manner of animal varieties using artificial selection. He then
   extrapolated from this that, given the millions of years his friend
   Charles Lyell proposed, whole new types of organisms could evolve
   “naturally” using Blyth’s process, hence natural selection. What Blyth
   saw as a conservative force in God’s creation meant to keep populations
   from breaking down, Darwin turned into a creative force that turned
   organisms into entirely new kinds of organisms over eons of time.

   When Darwin published his famous book, the ground had already been
   prepared for its acceptance, particularly within the church. The
   scientific community, by and large, had accepted the millions-of-years
   hypothesis of Lyell and James Hutton, and these ideas, sadly, had
   seeped into the church. Numerous leading theologians of the day, such
   as Thomas Chalmers, were advocates of the Gap Theory, which attempted
   to add millions of years into the Bible. The influence of Chalmers and
   others like him caused many in the church to unquestioningly accept
   millions of years and some to even add Darwin’s evolutionary ideas into
   the Bible.

Evolutionary Thought Since Darwin

   Since Darwin’s time, evolution has become the dominant dogma in the
   sciences, even in seemingly unrelated areas. It is impossible to go to
   a secular school and not get overdosed with evolutionary teaching. The
   base model of the dogma has changed very little since Darwin.

   Evolutionists still teach that man evolved from apelike creatures over
   millions of years. Other aspects of the idea have been filled in so
   that the evolutionary skeleton looks a little more complete, at least
   for public consumption. However, digging beneath the surface reveals
   things are not well in the evolutionary dogma.

   Evolution became permanently immortalized in American culture in 1925
   in what was termed the “Scopes Monkey Trial” in Tennessee. Attempting
   to challenge a Tennessee state law that forbade teaching human
   evolution, the ACLU prompted a substitute teacher named John Scopes to
   admit to breaking the law, even though he later acknowledged he had
   never done so. The trial took on monumental proportions when two of the
   most famous lawyers in America, Clarence Darrow and William Jennings
   Bryan, took opposite positions. The trial ended with Scopes being
   convicted, but not before Darrow tricked Bryan into testifying and used
   him as a pincushion to mock the Bible.

   The trial was later immortalized in a Hollywood move entitled Inherit
   the Wind, which got almost every basic fact about the case wrong and
   painted biblical creationists in the worst light possible. Tennessee’s
   law was eventually repealed, and Darwin’s ideas are now dominant in the
   public school system across the nation.
   Genetic Challenge

The Genetic Challenge to Classic Darwinian Evolution

   Darwin had no knowledge of genetics, even though Mendel’s
   groundbreaking work on genetics was published during his lifetime. When
   genetics made its way into mainstream science, evolutionists adapted
   Darwin’s ideas to fit the emerging study of genetics, forming what is
   called the Modern Synthesis of Darwinian evolution, or neo-Darwinism.
   Most evolutionists today are adherents of neo-Darwinism to one extent
   or another. Neo-Darwinism emphasizes four major forces: gene flow,
   genetic drift, natural selection, and mutations. From these four
   forces, neo-Darwinists believe that they can explain the diversity of
   life on earth.

   Natural selection is the primary mover in the evolutionary dogma.
   Natural selection allows organisms that are best suited to their
   environment to survive and pass on their genetics with greater
   frequency. These organisms, because they are best suited for their
   environment, produce the most offspring. Over time, the traits of these
   organisms become dominant in a population. This is where mutations come
   in.

   Evolutionists regard mutations as the force that creates new variation.
   While they acknowledge that mutations almost always remove genetic
   potential, they believe that on rare occasions a mutation will occur
   that can create an entirely new trait that is beneficial in a certain
   environment. Natural selection will then increase this trait in a
   population. Given enough time, and enough beneficial mutations,
   neo-Darwinists believe that one kind of organism can turn into another
   kind of organism—a fish can become a philosopher.

How Mutations Work in Real Life

   But the observable facts do not fit evolutionists’ dogma. Natural
   selection does happen, but it works just as Blyth envisioned it did: as
   a preservative, weeding out the worst mutations to preserve the health
   of a population. Scientists acknowledge natural selection is not the
   same as evolution. Mutations likewise occur, but most if not all
   mutations described as beneficial are only beneficial in certain, often
   unusual, situations.

   Antibiotic resistant bacteria is an often-cited example of evolution in
   action by means of mutation and natural selection. Antibiotic
   resistance already existed in bacterial populations before they were
   exposed to antibiotics. When artificial selection was applied in the
   form of antibiotics, the resistant ones survived. However, if there is
   no antibiotic present, resistant bacteria represent a tiny percentage
   of the population. This is because the way they avoid the antibiotic
   also results in them having a much harder time intaking nutrients. The
   mutation is only advantageous in a very specific circumstance, yet
   detrimental in a normal environment. God even created bacteria “after
   their kind” so they will always be bacteria.

No Increase in Genetic Information

   There is no known observable process by which new genetic information
   can be added to an organism’s genetic code, let alone how that
   information could arise from random chemicals in the first place.
   Information requires an intelligent source, since it requires not only
   data but also the ability to decode that data. This alone is enough to
   refute evolution because there’s no way for a fish to become an
   amphibian without new information.
   Origin of Life

The Origin of Life in Darwinian Evolution

   Any ideas about how life could have started on earth overlook one
   important rule in biology: life doesn’t, cannot, and will never come
   from non-life. Life always comes from life. That’s the law—the law of
   biogenesis, to be exact. Scientists who try to simulate the origin of
   life really show how much intelligence is required for life to begin in
   the first place.

   While Darwin himself never addressed the origin of the universe and
   rarely touched on the origin of life, both are key aspects of
   evolutionary dogma. While many evolutionists attempt to distance
   themselves from these, particularly the origin-of-life question, both
   are fundamentally necessary for evolution to be true. Since most
   evolutionists insist on a naturalistic explanation for everything, the
   origin of life and origin of the universe are both fundamental
   questions evolutionists must answer to support their dogma and a
   naturalistic worldview.

   The origin-of-life question has troubled evolutionists for decades. In
   Darwin’s day, the internal workings of the cell were completely
   unknown. It was easy to speculate about the origin of something
   regarded simply as a tiny bag of slime. However, as we learned more
   about the intiricate workings of the cell, this became much more
   difficult.

   In the 1950s, a famous experiment at the University of Chicago known as
   the Miller-Urey experiment attempted to demonstrate the naturalistic
   origin of life. In the textbooks and headlines, they are said to have
   created the building blocks of life in a test tube. What they actually
   created was a toxic soup that included amino acids, which had to be
   removed from the reaction chamber before they were destroyed in a
   second pass. The experiment also deliberately excluded oxygen, as it
   would have destroyed their results. This experiment is still cited
   today as evidence of life from non-life, likely because all attempts to
   improve on the experiment have failed to produce even the basic
   structures needed for life.

The Fossil-Record Problem for Evolution

   The fossil record is regularly trotted out as containing the finest
   examples of evolutionary changes in organisms. Yet within the
   evolutionist community itself, there was a massive schism in the 1970s
   when the late Stephen Jay Gould and Niles Eldredge proposed the idea of
   punctuated equilibrium. This idea acknowledged a virtual absence of
   transitional forms in the fossil record and proposed that evolution was
   not a gradual process. Instead, it was a jerky, jumpy process that
   mostly involved stasis before great leaps of change. While less common
   today with the influence of the dynamic Gould removed, the mere fact
   that this idea gained popularity attests to the lack of transitional
   forms in the fossil record.

   Evolutionists prop up their dogma by claiming the earth is millions or
   even billions of years old. The most common proof of these great ages
   is radiometric dating. It is not carbon-14 dating, despite Hollywood
   being fixated on this dating method. Carbon-14 dating would only work
   on carbon-containing materials that are “only” a few tens of thousands
   of years old. Yet carbon-14 has been found in diamonds, which are
   supposedly billions of years old. It should be long gone, but it isn’t.

   Other forms of radiometric dating include uranium-lead dating,
   potassium-argon dating, rubidium-strontium dating and so on. All are
   governed by three basic assumptions. Scientists assume they know how
   much of both the parent and daughter element existed in the rock when
   it was formed. They assume that none of either the parent or daughter
   element was added or lost during the decay process.

   Finally, they assume that the rate of decay has been constant. None of
   these assumptions can be empirically proven. In fact, creationists have
   done radiometric testing on rocks of known ages, such as those formed
   in the Mount St. Helens eruption, and found that they dated at tens of
   thousands of years old despite being formed in 1980. Radiometric dating
   does not work as a reliable indicator of the age of the earth or its
   rocks.

   Very little of what evolutionists present as evidence for their dogma
   is good science. In fact, the mere idea of naturalistic evolution is
   anti-science. If evolution were true and if a random chance process
   created the world, then that same process of chance created the human
   brain and its powers of logic. If the brain and its use of logic came
   about by chance, why trust its conclusions? To be consistent,
   evolutionists should reject their own ability to reason logically. Of
   course if they did that, they would have to reject their own dogma as
   well, compelling them to accept a creator. Evolution is a self-refuting
   religion.

   The types of changes evolution requires would be expected to provide
   many examples of missing links in virtually every layer of the geologic
   record. This is not the case. The geologic record is better explained
   by the global flood and the subsequent localized catastrophes after the
   flood.
   Christian Theology

Evolution’s Effects on Christian Theology

   Unfortunately, as in Darwin’s day, much of the church has accepted
   millions of years and evolution as fact, without ever considering the
   underlying assumptions or how the acceptance of these assumptions
   undermines the biblical text and the gospel.

   For example, consider what happens when you attempt to add evolution
   into the Bible. Adam and Eve are no longer the first humans, and
   original sin goes out the window. This does irreparable damage to the
   biblical redemption narrative. The Bible says that death came into the
   world because of man’s sin (Romans 5:12) and that all of creation
   labors under a curse because of sin (Romans 8:22). Scripture also says
   that Christ is the last Adam, come to redeem us from the sin brought
   into the world through the first man, Adam (1 Corinthians 15:22, 45).
   If Adam were a mythical figure, which is what evolution demands, even
   in a Christianized form, the entire parallel between the two Adams and
   the kinsman redeemer concept is destroyed. By advocating evolution,
   theistic evolutionists are undermining the very tenets of Christianity.

   Those Christians who reject evolution but accept millions of years have
   an equivalent problem. Jesus, when explaining marriage to the
   Sadducees, referred to Adam and Eve as existing from the beginning of
   creation (Mark 10:6). According to those who accept millions of years,
   Adam and Eve only existed after billions and millions of years of
   death: this makes Jesus either ignorant or a liar. Further, when God
   finished his creation he called everything very good (Genesis 1:31). In
   order for the millions of years to be true, God would have to be
   calling the fossil record, which records disease, death, violence, and
   suffering, very good. That is inconsistent with the character of God
   revealed throughout the rest of Scripture.

   God tells us in Genesis exactly how he created the world, and even the
   order of events doesn’t match the evolutionary tale. In addition, one
   of the things that drives evolution is death. But the Bible teaches
   that death was introduced into the perfect world as a result of Adam’s
   sin. When Christians try to reinterpret God’s infallible Word based on
   the ideas of fallible men, it undermines the gospel of Jesus Christ.
   Answers For Evolutionists

Evolution and the Flood

   Further, attempting to combine evolution or millions of years with the
   biblical text forces Christians to reject the reality of the global
   flood of Noah’s day. If the fossil record was laid down before man,
   then the flood is not necessary to bury the fossils and, in fact,
   conflicts with the existing record. Therefore, according to these
   individuals, the flood had to be local or mythical. This raises all
   manner of questions such as; why did God not just tell Noah to move or
   how did a local flood cover all the mountains and yet remain local? The
   only way to get around these questions is to torture the Hebrew text
   and the concept of biblical inerrancy.

   Evolution, whether couched in Christianized language or presented in
   its natural atheistic colors, remains an utterly bankrupt and failed
   hypothesis about the origin of the universe or the diversity of life on
   earth. In no instance has cosmological, geological, or biological
   evolution been demonstrated, and the most common evidences for
   evolution all have been debunked. Attempting to add evolution to
   Christianity is both unbiblical and irrational, since evolution itself
   is not science but anti-science. Neither the Bible nor empirical
   science support its claims.

Evolution Requires Faith

   For many, a belief in evolution comes from the desire to remove the
   need for God as Creator. Some would say evolution comes from what the
   evidence says to us. But evidence never speaks for itself, it’s always
   interpreted using your assumptions and starting points. And only when
   you examine the evidence through the lens of the Bible does it makes
   sense.

   Evolution is rooted in the belief system of naturalism that doesn’t
   allow for anything outside the laws of nature to explain how our world
   operates. Ironically, naturalism requires the violation of several
   known laws of the universe.

     * The law of biogenesis (life only comes from life)
     * The uniformity of nature (uniformity cannot exist or be expected
       without a creator)
     * The laws of physics (the big bang requires the suspension of the
       laws of physics, nor could those laws exist without a creator)
     * The laws of probability (the fine tuning of the universe requires a
       creator)
     * The laws of logic (logic requires a logical source)
     * The laws of chemistry (the consistent properties of the elements
       require intelligence)
     * The laws of information (information can only come from an
       intelligence)

   To accept that all of these things truly operate in the world without
   God as their Creator and Organizer requires an immense amount of faith.
   While it is often used as a criticism of Christians, those who have an
   evolutionary worldview must accept all of these things by blind faith
   since there is no naturalistic explanation for the existence of these
   laws. While Christians also accept certain truths by faith, it is faith
   in the Creator and Lawgiver who provides a basis for those truths, not
   a blind faith in blind, chance processes.

Myths About Evolution

     * “98% similarity” between human and chimp DNA
       This difference actually represents millions of letters of
       difference and many differences are not represented in the “98%
       similarity.” This is actually strong evidence for a common
       Designer, who used common building blocks in his design but gave
       humanity characteristics unlike any other creature he made.
     * “Ape-men”
       The pervasive ape-to-human montage and other "reconstructions" are
       just artwork based on imagination, wishful thinking, and
       presuppositional influence. All the supposed ape-men can be
       classified as either human or ape, not transitional forms.
     * Bad Design
       Some structures seem to show less-than-optimal design, and to some
       evolutionists this proves there is no creator. But a universe that
       has been cursed with degeneration for over 6,000 years won't
       maintain optimal design. The fact that we continue to survive is
       evidence of how good the original design was.
     * Vestigial Organs and Junk DNA
       Evolutionists claim that humans and other animals have organs and
       DNA leftover from evolution. But these reports are often based on
       evolutionary expectations. The appendix, for example, was once
       thought vestigial, but now we know its function. Even a true loss
       of function shows a world that is in decay, which is exactly what
       the Bible says.
     * All Scientists Agree
       Even if every single person accepted an idea, that doesn’t make the
       idea correct. Many embrace evolution because they won’t allow for
       anything miraculous or supernatural. But there are a growing number
       of scientists, creationist and not, who do not find the supposed
       evidence for evolution to be valid or convincing.
     * Similarities Show Past Evolutionary Connections
       Similarities in anatomy supposedly prove descent from a common
       ancestor. But structures that appear similar (homologous) often
       develop under the control of genes that are not homologous. There
       is another logical reason why things look alike—creation by an
       intelligent designer using a common blueprint.

Life-Changing Answers for Evolutionists

   There are numerous anatomical structures that are clearly designed.
   Many are irreducibly complex, meaning the parts serve no benefit unless
   they all exist and are working together. There are many such examples
   of design in biology. All of these point to an intelligent Creator and
   Designer.

   So we’re left with an inescapable conclusion: there must be a powerful
   and super-wise Creator. With such a Creator, you no longer need
   billions of years. He could create everything in much less
   time—say . . . six days. This Creator gave us a clear record (the
   Bible) of how he created the world, how long it took him, how humans
   fell into sin, and how God the Son (Jesus) came to earth to save us
   from our sinful rebellion against him.
   Watch the video on YouTube.

   Since we can trust the Bible’s history and science, we can also trust
   what it says about Jesus Christ, God’s Son, and why he came. Keep
   reading to find more answers!

Evolution Topics

     * Big Bang

Big Bang
       Does observational science support the big bang, the idea that 13
       billion years ago all matter came from nothing and eventually
       formed everything we see today?
     * Charles Darwin

Charles Darwin
       Charles Darwin, famed author of Origin of Species, is remembered as
       the man who popularized evolution. Have the last 200 years of
       research proved his ideas?
     * Evidence Against Evolution

Evidence Against Evolution
       Contrary to the popular cry that “science has proven evolution as
       fact,” the scientific facts themselves argue against evolution.
     * Human Evolution

Human Evolution
       Are humans simply the by-product of evolution from an ape-like
       ancestor or were they lovingly fashioned by God in His own image?
     * Missing Links

Missing Links
       Do transitional forms really exist between microbe and
       microbiologist, or are they missing links? In the biblical
       worldview, they never existed at all!
     * Natural Selection

Natural Selection
       Is natural selection, which uses existing information leading to
       varations in organisms, proof of information-adding,
       molecules-to-man evolution?
     * Origin of Life

Origin of Life
       Big bangs and stardust, primordial soup, meteorites with amino
       acids, or maybe aliens seeded life on earth? A Creator God is a
       much more logical choice.
     * Scopes Trial

Scopes Trial
       Trial of the century! Bryan cannot defend Scripture due to
       old-earth compromises. Evolution in schools loses the court battle
       but wins the classrooms.
     * Theistic Evolution

Theistic Evolution
       Theistic evolution, the idea that God used evolution to create
       life, poses great danger to the gospel, the Bible’s authority, and
       the character of the Creator.
     * Theory of Evolution

Theory of Evolution
       Biological evolution: is it a scientific fact, a theory, or just a
       hypothesis? How does this model of origins hold up under careful
       scientific scrutiny?
     * Young-Earth Evolution

Young-Earth Evolution
       Subtle ideas that don’t comport with Scripture or are unnecessarily
       accommodating of evolutionary ideas are causing problems within the
       church.

News About Evolution

     * News
       Has the Puzzle of Deep-Sea-Fish Evolution Been Solved?
       Has the Puzzle of Deep-Sea-Fish Evolution Been Solved?
       Sept. 23, 2023 from Ken Ham Blog
       Fossilization, especially of something as fragile as a small trail
       in the mud, is a rare process requiring very specific conditions,
       particularly a quick burial.
     * News
       Breaking News: Evolutionary Story Gets Rewritten . . . Again
       Breaking News: Evolutionary Story Gets Rewritten . . . Again
       Aug. 4, 2023 from Ken Ham Blog
       Evolution is getting another rewrite (this happens regularly), this
       time regarding the story of the supposed origin of life.
     * News
       One of Evolution’s Most Famous Stories Gets a Rewrite
       One of Evolution’s Most Famous Stories Gets a Rewrite
       July 10, 2023 from Ken Ham Blog
       In a biblical worldview, we know the evolutionary view of human
       history is nothing but a fairy tale—but now some evolutionists are
       also saying it needs an overhaul.

Articles About Evolution

     * Semi-Technical Magazine Article
       Evolution’s Surprising New Critics
       Evolution’s Surprising New Critics
       Nov. 5, 2023 from Answers Magazine
       Prominent scientists are speaking out against Darwinian evolution,
       and they’re not even creationists.
     * Semi-Technical Magazine Department Article
       Is Natural Selection at Odds with Creation?
       Is Natural Selection at Odds with Creation?
       March 5, 2023 from Answers Magazine
       The young-earth creationist view has been so maligned in popular
       culture that many people think creationists deny basic facts of
       life.
     * Semi-Technical Magazine Article
       The New Origin of Species
       The New Origin of Species
       Nov. 6, 2022 from Answers Magazine
       A Harvard-trained geneticist shows how new findings have shattered
       Darwin’s best guesses about the origin of species.

Recommended Resources

     * Replacing Darwin Replacing Darwin$24.99
     * The Evolution of Darwin Series: Video download The Evolution of
       Darwin Series: Video download$19.99
     * Evolution Exposed Power Pack Evolution Exposed Power Pack$19.99Sale
     * Three Ways to Make an Ape Man Three Ways to Make an Ape Man$12.99

     * Answers
     * Online Books
     * Animals
     * Bible
     * Creation
     * Evolution
     * God
     * Science
     * Worldview

Newsletter

   Get the latest answers emailed to you.
   ________________
   [ ] I agree to the current Privacy Policy.

   This site is protected by reCAPTCHA, and the Google Privacy Policy and
   Terms of Service apply.
   (Subscribe) Subscribe

Thank You!

   Thank you for signing up to receive email newsletters from Answers in
   Genesis.

   You can also sign up for our free print newsletter (US only).

Finish your subscription

   You're almost done! Please follow the instructions we emailed you in
   order to finish subscribing.

   You can also sign up for our free print newsletter (US only).

Whoops!

   Your newsletter signup did not work out. Please refresh the page and
   try again.
   Support the creation/gospel message by donating or getting involved!
   Answers in Genesis logo

   Answers in Genesis is an apologetics ministry, dedicated to helping
   Christians defend their faith and proclaim the good news of Jesus
   Christ.

   Learn more
     * Customer Service 800.778.3390
     * © 2024 Answers in Genesis

   Questions? Feedback? powered by Olark live chat software
