   (BUTTON) Back to Top Skip to main content

   U.S. flag

   An official website of the United States government
   (BUTTON) Here's how you know
   Dot gov

   The .gov means it’s official.
   Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing
   sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site.
   Https

   The site is secure.
   The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website
   and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted
   securely.

   NIH NLM Logo
   Log in (BUTTON) Show account info
   (BUTTON) Close

Account

   Logged in as:
   username
     * Dashboard
     * Publications
     * Account settings
     * Log out

   Access keys NCBI Homepage MyNCBI Homepage Main Content Main Navigation

   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   Search PMC Full-Text Archive ____________________ (BUTTON) Search in
   PMC
     * Advanced Search
     * User Guide

   (BUTTON)

     * Journal List
     * Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
     * v.376(1828); July 5, 2021
     * PMC8126466

Other Formats

     * PubReader
     * PDF (441K)

Actions

     * (BUTTON) Cite
     *

   (BUTTON) Collections
   Add to Collections
     * ( ) Create a new collection
     * (*) Add to an existing collection

   Name your collection: ____________________
   Name must be less than characters
   Choose a collection:
   Unable to load your collection due to an error
   Please try again
   (BUTTON) Add (BUTTON) Cancel

        Share

     *
     *
     * (BUTTON)
       Permalink
       https://www.ncbi.nlm (BUTTON) Copy

        RESOURCES

     * (BUTTON) Similar articles
     * (BUTTON) Cited by other articles
     * (BUTTON) Links to NCBI Databases

     * Journal List
     * Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
     * v.376(1828); July 5, 2021
     * PMC8126466

   As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion
   in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
   the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health.
   Learn more: PMC Disclaimer | PMC Copyright Notice

   Logo of transb

   Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. July 5, 2021; 376(1828): 20200259.
   Published online May 17, 2021. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2020.0259
   PMCID: PMC8126466
   PMID: 33993758

Underappreciated features of cultural evolution

   Marco Smolla,^ corresponding author ^1 Fredrik Jansson,^2,^3 Laurent
   Lehmann,^4 Wybo Houkes,^5 Franz J. Weissing,^6,^7 Peter Hammerstein,^8
   Sasha R. X. Dall,^9 Bram Kuijper,^9 and Magnus Enquist^2,^10

Marco Smolla

   ^1Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA,
   USA
   Find articles by Marco Smolla

Fredrik Jansson

   ^2Centre for Cultural Evolution, Stockholm University, Stockholm,
   Sweden

   ^3Division of Applied Mathematics, Mälardalen University, Västerås,
   Sweden
   Find articles by Fredrik Jansson

Laurent Lehmann

   ^4Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Lausanne,
   Biophore, Lausanne, Switzerland
   Find articles by Laurent Lehmann

Wybo Houkes

   ^5Philosophy and Ethics, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven,
   The Netherlands
   Find articles by Wybo Houkes

Franz J. Weissing

   ^6Groningen Institute for Evolutionary Life Sciences, University of
   Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands

   ^7Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
   Find articles by Franz J. Weissing

Peter Hammerstein

   ^8Institute for Theoretical Biology, Humboldt University, Berlin,
   Germany
   Find articles by Peter Hammerstein

Sasha R. X. Dall

   ^9Centre for Ecology and Conservation, University of Exeter, Penryn, UK
   Find articles by Sasha R. X. Dall

Bram Kuijper

   ^9Centre for Ecology and Conservation, University of Exeter, Penryn, UK
   Find articles by Bram Kuijper

Magnus Enquist

   ^2Centre for Cultural Evolution, Stockholm University, Stockholm,
   Sweden

   ^10Department of Zoology, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden
   Find articles by Magnus Enquist
   Author information Article notes Copyright and License information PMC
   Disclaimer
   ^1Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA,
   USA
   ^2Centre for Cultural Evolution, Stockholm University, Stockholm,
   Sweden
   ^3Division of Applied Mathematics, Mälardalen University, Västerås,
   Sweden
   ^4Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Lausanne,
   Biophore, Lausanne, Switzerland
   ^5Philosophy and Ethics, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven,
   The Netherlands
   ^6Groningen Institute for Evolutionary Life Sciences, University of
   Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands
   ^7Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
   ^8Institute for Theoretical Biology, Humboldt University, Berlin,
   Germany
   ^9Centre for Ecology and Conservation, University of Exeter, Penryn, UK
   ^10Department of Zoology, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden
   ^corresponding author Corresponding author.
   Marco Smolla: ude.nnepu.sas@alloms
   One contribution of 15 to a theme issue ‘Foundations of cultural
   evolution’.
   Accepted October 23, 2020.
   Copyright © 2021 The Author(s)
   Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved.

Associated Data

   Data Availability Statement
          This article has no additional data.

Abstract

   Cultural evolution theory has long been inspired by evolutionary
   biology. Conceptual analogies between biological and cultural evolution
   have led to the adoption of a range of formal theoretical approaches
   from population dynamics and genetics. However, this has resulted in a
   research programme with a strong focus on cultural transmission. Here,
   we contrast biological with cultural evolution, and highlight aspects
   of cultural evolution that have not received sufficient attention
   previously. We outline possible implications for evolutionary dynamics
   and argue that not taking them into account will limit our
   understanding of cultural systems. We propose 12 key questions for
   future research, among which are calls to improve our understanding of
   the combinatorial properties of cultural innovation, and the role of
   development and life history in cultural dynamics. Finally, we discuss
   how this vibrant research field can make progress by embracing its
   multidisciplinary nature.

   This article is part of the theme issue ‘Foundations of cultural
   evolution’.
   Keywords: cultural evolution, evolutionary biology, human evolution,
   cumulative culture, cultural systems

1.  Introduction

   Culture is one of the most complex collective phenomena we know. The
   capacity of our species to produce and accumulate culture (i.e. the
   collection of socially transmitted attitudes, beliefs, knowledge,
   skills, technologies, values, etc.) has allowed us to inhabit virtually
   every part of the planet, making culture a cornerstone to the
   ecological success of our species (e.g. [1,2]). Moreover, no other
   species produce as many different and complex cultural products and is
   undoubtedly as reliant on them as we are [2,3]. As such, the study of
   culture and how it changes has been central to the research programme
   of many disciplines, from the humanities and social sciences to the
   natural sciences.

   To better understand the origin and nature of culture, how culture
   emerges and changes over time, why some aspects of culture change
   continuously or abruptly while others remain relatively unchanged, or
   why sometimes neighbouring groups differ and distant groups share
   certain cultural practices, there has been a centuries-long effort to
   devise or formulate a general theory of culture. One such approach is
   the application of evolutionary theory to culture. Inspired by Darwin’s
   publication ‘On the Origin of Species’ [4], the idea of taking an
   evolutionary perspective on (human) culture has received considerable
   research interest from scholars in many fields. The popularity of using
   evolutionary terminology when describing cultural change, however, has
   varied considerably over time (for overviews of evolutionary thinking
   in the humanities and social sciences, see [5–10]). This was in part
   due to a lack of understanding of biological evolution but also based
   on the politically motivated misuse of evolutionary theory (see [11]).

   A more recent approach to studying cultural evolution was inspired by
   the quantitative theories that emerged in the life sciences in the
   first half of the twentieth century. They were the direct result of
   major advances in the understanding of the evolutionary process, marked
   by the Modern Synthesis that unified Darwinian evolution with Mendelian
   genetics. These novel formal descriptions of biological transmission
   greatly increased the understanding of biological evolution. The
   theoretical models by Fisher [12], Wright [13] and Haldane [14] cast
   verbal theories and thought experiments in the precise language of
   mathematics, which allowed a systematic analysis of the processes
   involved in and the consequences for biological evolution. Moreover,
   using formal theoretical models has proven useful for extracting the
   most important features from complex processes, by keeping track of
   many often parallel processes, and they explain complex macroscopic
   patterns (e.g. diversity and distribution of traits) with simpler
   individual-level processes, such as variability, competition and
   inheritance.

   Inspired by this progress, the now seminal works by Cavalli-Sforza &
   Feldman [15], Lumsden & Wilson [16] and Boyd & Richerson [17] aimed
   collectively at a general theory of culture. The idea was to base this
   new theory on mathematical approaches from population dynamics and
   genetics to explain the distribution and change of traits in
   populations of individuals, be it genetic or cultural traits. To
   justify this approach, the authors assumed and outlined structural and
   conceptual analogies between biological and cultural evolution. At an
   abstract level, population-level processes in both domains are
   characterized by the continuous emergence, selective retention, and
   transmission of variation [18–21]. Hence, analogies have been made
   between the forces driving the evolution of genetic traits
   (transmission, mutation, drift and selection) and those driving the
   evolution of cultural traits (transmission, innovation, random
   fluctuations and selection). Additionally, both types are characterized
   by observable phenomena (e.g. an adapted species and cumulative
   culture) that are high-level properties (of a species and a population,
   respectively), which are the result of low-level interactions (at the
   level of individuals). Finally, both biological and cultural evolution
   are cumulative processes. That is, traits evolve successively through
   repeatedly modifying, combining, re-combining and re-purposing existing
   traits. These novel traits could not evolve in just one or a few
   generations due to their historical dependencies [22]. This process can
   lead to adaptation and increased trait complexity. However, the latter
   is not strictly necessary for the former as adaptations can sometimes
   come with a significant reduction in complexity [23]. In box 1, we
   summarize the most important similarities which are discussed more
   thoroughly elsewhere [15,17–19,23–26].

   In contrast to the aforementioned general similarities, there are
   obvious differences between cultural and biological evolution that
   require mathematical approaches to be adapted [27]. For example, if
   parents exhibit different variants of a cultural trait (e.g. hunting
   versus fishing), then there is no general principle that makes their
   children prefer one over the other. Children might even reject traits
   from both parents, which is impossible for genetic traits.
   Additionally, cultural traits are not strictly acquired from parents
   (vertical transmission). Instead, transmission can occur between any
   individuals, from one-to-many or many-to-one. And so, traits can also
   be acquired from peers (horizontal) or other adults (oblique); even
   inverse transmission from younger to older individuals is common.
   Moreover, biases towards copying successful, powerful, prestigious, or
   otherwise notable individuals can further modify the transmission
   dynamics [28]. The different transmission modes and biases, and their
   combinations, give rise to a large and complex space of potential
   patterns and dynamics in the distribution of cultural traits.

   In fact, this space is so rich that the overwhelming amount of cultural
   evolution research has primarily focused on cultural transmission. What
   the aforementioned seminal books started has become a rich and vibrant
   research field that has garnered much interest from researchers across
   disciplines, leading to a large number of recent books (e.g.
   [1,11,29–31]) and themed journal issues (e.g. [32–35]). Moreover,
   recent research articles show that the study of cultural transmission
   is not only relevant for understanding what shaped human origins, but
   also to make sense of what is happening in the present, from the spread
   of news on social media [36] to healthy behaviour in social networks
   [37], and many other features of the ‘information age’. This
   development has also sparked the question to what extent culture exists
   in other animals [2], given the growing evidence for widespread social
   learning in nature [38–43].

   Precisely because of this surge of interest, we believe it is an ideal
   moment to identify potential avenues for future cultural evolution
   research. We believe that there are a number of differences between
   biological and cultural evolution that have still not received
   sufficient attention. We identify specific differences by contrasting
   characteristics of biological and cultural evolution and point out some
   (table 1) that are of special interest. Our analysis mainly focuses on
   unique features of the acquisition, storage, recall and transmission,
   and the emergence and selection of new cultural traits and how they
   differ from those associated with genetically inherited traits. We then
   discuss the consequences of these differences and potential
   implications for our understanding of cultural evolution. Our main aim
   is to contribute to opening up new lines of investigation, novel
   insights, and testable hypotheses.

Table 1.

   A list of differences between biological and cultural evolution. The
   table is organized in a sequence of logical steps, beginning with the
   storage, acquisition, transmission and selection of traits, and ending
   with the generation of new variants. To keep the table comprehensive
   but intuitive, we used general models of evolution, with a standard
   model of a sexually reproducing species in the biological evolution
   column, and a minimal case of human cultural evolution in which culture
   is predominately stored as mental representations in the cultural
   evolution column.
   trait biological evolution cultural evolution
   storage
    medium genome nervous system
    recall and alteration recall only recall and alteration
   acquisition single event at conception sequential events throughout
   life
   transmission
    mechanism transmission of physical copies learning processes based on
   social observations and communication as input
    pathways from parents to offspring between any individuals
    receiver dependence no yes
   sorting processes natural selection highly diverse and often in
   combination with other processes
   generation of new variants mutation, recombination diverse and often
   incentive-driven
   Open in a separate window

   This paper is an attempt to elucidate and discuss important
   similarities and differences between biological and cultural evolution.
   We are aware that there are many different ways to approach this task,
   and so this list will never be exhaustive. Additionally, we constrain
   our scope to modelling approaches that rely on individual interactions
   to explain the emergence of higher-level patterns, as compared to those
   that, for example, apply phylogenetic methods on observed patterns to
   infer past dynamics (e.g. [44,45]). However, we believe that this
   discourse provides interesting, even provocative, new material for
   thought and discussion, which, we hope, will inform future research,
   experimental testing and especially formal theoretical work.

Box 1.

General similarities between biological and cultural evolution.

     * I.
       Evolution takes place in populations of individuals or units
     * II.
       Continuous generation of new variants based on existing traits
     * III.
       Differential retention of existing traits
     * IV.
       Transmission of traits between individuals
     * V.
       Evolution is the outcome of many microscopic events (II, III and
       IV)
     * VI.
       Outcomes and emerging patterns:
          + —
            Diversity and divergence
          + —
            Cumulative evolution
          + —
            Historical dependencies
          + —
            Complexity and adaptation

2.  Differences between biological and cultural evolution

   In this section, we summarize several important differences between
   biological and cultural evolution, before we discuss implications for
   theories of cultural evolution in the following section. Table 1 is an
   attempt to identify core differences by contrasting various aspects of
   biological and cultural evolution. Some of the listed differences have
   been considered previously [11,15,17,27,34] while others have received
   less attention. We argue that recognizing these differences will affect
   the understanding of cultural evolution in general, and modelling
   approaches in particular, as it is well known that even small changes
   to the mechanisms of dynamical systems can fundamentally change their
   behaviour, results and interpretation.

   It is important to note that (human) cognitive abilities, many unique,
   are a factor in many of the items listed under cultural evolution in
   the table and thus have consequences for the dynamics and outcome of
   cultural evolution. For instance, opportunities for cultural
   recombination and thus generation of new culture is significantly
   enhanced by human thinking, planning and problem-solving abilities.
   These abilities will also play an important role in individual
   filtering as well as in learning processes.

   The table entries would look partly different, for example, if we
   considered bacteria (with access to horizontal gene transfer [46]), and
   cultural artefacts and externalized information storage (see §2a). One
   aspect that is not included in the table is processing. While it is
   undoubtedly integral to both biological and cultural evolution, some
   sort of processing is occurring in all items of the table.

(a) Storage

   The way in which information is stored differs fundamentally between
   cultural and biological evolution. In biological evolution, information
   (genetic traits) is encoded in and stored as the sequence of physical
   molecular structures, the genome. By contrast, in cultural evolution,
   cultural information within individuals (cultural traits) takes the
   form of mental representations, which are encoded as neuronal
   connections in the brain. This difference in the nature of trait
   storage means that an individual cannot change its genome, but can make
   changes to the composition of its cultural traits. For example, while
   genes can be frequently and accurately accessed and copied, there are
   very limited possibilities of passing information to the genome that
   can be inherited by offspring. By contrast, mental representations
   cannot be directly observed or copied [47], but due to the high
   flexibility of the nervous system, mental representations can be
   continuously altered before they are exhibited and transmitted to
   others. These differences have consequences for the evolutionary
   dynamics and concerns several of the other items in the table, which we
   will address in §3.

   Since artefacts (cultural products) reside in the external world, all
   the information for producing them often need not be contained within
   individuals and can be easily transmitted and accumulated over
   generations. Furthermore, in the light of our ability to externalize
   information storage, computation and filtering (and in part creation),
   an increasingly important question is how information technology
   changes cultural evolution as well as our mental abilities (e.g. [29]).

(b) Acquisition

   Based on the difference in the nature of trait storage in cultural and
   biological evolution, the acquisition of traits is also fundamentally
   different. Genetic traits are in place at the beginning of an
   individual’s life, whereas cultural traits are acquired throughout the
   entire life. An important consequence of continuous acquisition is that
   culture is acquired sequentially through a combination of episodes of
   social learning (learning from others), and individual practice (trial
   and error, insight, etc.). The importance of individual practice cannot
   be understated. It has been demonstrated in numerous studies in
   developmental psychology and educational science that many cultural
   traits require substantial individual efforts to be successfully
   learned (e.g. [48,49]). For example, hunting skills require extensive
   social learning to acquire the fundamental behaviours and techniques
   but they also rely on lifelong improvement through individual learning
   [50]. This difference between cultural and biological evolution has
   received rather limited attention, but it may be one of the most
   important ones influencing evolutionary dynamics [51,52]. As we will
   discuss below, the fact that humans are born without culture and
   acquire culture sequentially, making the individual an active force in
   the transmission, has several consequences for the dynamics of cultural
   evolution, including, for instance, the fact that previously acquired
   traits can facilitate or even preclude the subsequent acquisition of
   other traits, and that an individual may transmit different trait
   variants during different stages of its life. The fact that culture is
   acquired sequentially does not exclude the importance of inborn
   predispositions or abilities in the acquisition of culture.

(c) Transmission

(i) Mechanism

   In contrast to the transmission of physical copies of instructions in
   biological systems, in cultural systems transmission happens indirectly
   through learning processes based on observations of other individuals’
   behaviours, or their products (including communication, objects, or
   alterations to the environment), such that the observer can form its
   own mental representation of a cultural trait. This difference between
   cultural and biological evolution is widely recognized [15,17,24] and
   consistent with general findings in developmental psychology and
   educational science (e.g. [48,49]). Nevertheless, the concrete
   transmission process and its consequences for the evolutionary dynamics
   are not fully understood and are subject to an ongoing debate (see
   §3b). At its centre is the role of the relative fidelity of
   transmission in cultural dynamics. Two main schools of thought have
   emerged. The ‘California’ school sees accurate transmission as the main
   cause for cultural stability [15,17,53,54], whereas the ‘Paris’ school
   highlights the importance of constant reconstruction through biased
   transformation towards cultural attractors [55–57]. Recent attempts to
   unify these two schools rely on differentiating between cultural traits
   that can be faithfully copied, that is, actions, and those that cannot,
   for example beliefs and ideas [47].

   It is also important to note the importance of language in the
   transmission of cultural traits [21,58–60]. It allows for the
   transmission of complex data by replacing direct observations,
   delivering insightful synthetic information, and providing effective
   feedback [61]. There are likely many cultural traits that require
   language communication to be successfully transmitted, for example,
   cognitive abilities such as counting, reading and mental arithmetic.

(ii) Pathways

   Given that mental representations of cultural traits are transmitted
   through observation and recreation, there is no fixed transmission
   direction. Compared to biological evolution, where genes are
   transmitted from parents to offspring, transmission in cultural
   evolution can occur between any individuals. The diversity of possible
   transmission pathways, which in themselves are subject to cultural
   evolution, leads to interesting complex patterns [62].

(iii) Receiver dependence

   Another interesting and increasingly recognized difference of
   transmission in biological and cultural evolution is that genetic
   traits are supplied all at once, without the participation of the new
   individual. By contrast, in the transmission of cultural traits, not
   only the sender (teacher, model or demonstrator) but also the receiver
   (student or observer) can actively affect the transmission dynamics and
   thus evolutionary dynamics [16,17]. For instance, the observer may be
   selective about what and from whom to learn [16,17,63]. Such biases or
   social learning strategies [64,65] may be inborn [16,17] or stem from
   previously acquired cultural traits [22,66].

(d) Sorting processes

   Sorting processes are processes that lead to a non-random change in the
   frequency of traits. In biological evolution, the main sorting process
   is natural selection. How it operates is usually clear and well
   understood, and it brings a general understanding of biological
   adaptations. In cultural evolution, the situation is considerably more
   complex, which is in part due to the active role each individual takes
   in acquiring, exhibiting and transmitting cultural traits [17]. The
   most explored sorting mechanism that involves the individual in this
   way, operates in the receiver during social learning, in which content,
   model or conformity biases favour the acquisition of certain traits
   while rejecting others [67]. A trait may also be favoured or rejected
   subsequently when individuals get experiences of using the trait ([66],
   this issue). Sorting will also occur if individuals selectively display
   traits to potential learners, and when the generation of new trait
   variants is incentive-driven. Individuals may also exercise social
   control by, for instance, trying to influence what others do, or
   communicate by selectively punishing or rewarding such acts [68–70]. In
   addition, there is natural selection in cultural evolution, since
   cultural traits can influence survival and reproduction of their
   carriers and so affect trait frequencies [15,17]. For instance, a habit
   that increases survival may spread because it will make carriers of the
   trait more common among demonstrators. For the same reason, a habit
   that decreases survival will gradually disappear.

   In summary, sorting is possibly the most complex part of the
   evolutionary dynamics of cultural evolution, as it involves a number of
   different processes, and several of these occur in combination with
   other key processes such as transmission and generation of new culture.

(e) Generation of variation

   The continuous generation of variation is a central aspect of
   evolution. A generally recognized difference between biological and
   cultural evolution is that genetic variation is random and unrelated to
   any need or purpose. By contrast, in cultural evolution the generation
   of new variants can also be incentive-driven. This means that it is
   directed towards solving a concrete problem or reaching a certain goal.
   Important mechanisms include cognitive processing [71], deliberate
   experimentation [72–74], as well as trial-and-error and associative
   learning processes [71,75]. However, cultural variants may also occur
   because of mistakes, transmission errors, by-products of trying to
   solve other problems, or other circumstances that produce results that
   the individuals may learn from and subsequently transmit to other
   individuals [72]. Note that successful learning from unintended or
   unexpected outcomes is not free from incentive-driven aspects as it
   requires that the individual recognizes how such observations can be
   used.

3.  Implications and challenges for cultural evolution theory

   The differences that we discussed in the previous section can have
   dramatic effects on the evolutionary dynamics. In this part, we will
   discuss a selection of these that we think are particularly important
   to the further development of cultural evolution theory.

(a) Potential for fast evolution and complex culture

   Cultural evolution can proceed much faster than biological evolution,
   both in rate of change and in terms of trait complexity. This has been
   pointed out previously, and several reasons are generally given for why
   this is the case [1,11,15,17,67,76,77]. Firstly, acquisition and
   transmission of cultural traits occur along many pathways and
   throughout an individual’s entire lifetime. Secondly, novel or modified
   traits can be transmitted directly to other individuals (which is why
   cultural evolution is sometimes described as Lamarckian rather than
   Darwinian). Thirdly, the generation of novel variants can be
   incentive-driven. This may have a dramatic effect on the rate of
   evolution, since cultural traits will be much more likely to be
   productive once they ‘enter’ the real world. And, finally, language can
   be an important tool for efficient cultural transmission. It is
   necessary for transmitting abstract ideas, beliefs and values, and is a
   tool for the transmission of complex cultural traits, such as opaque
   processes, inaccessible observations, practices, algorithms and other
   mental skills.

   A full understanding of evolutionary rates and complex culture also
   requires a detailed understanding of cumulative cultural evolution.
   Cumulative culture is not only the accumulation of traits but also the
   innovation of new traits by combining or recombining existing traits
   [78–80]. This can result in a gradual increase in complexity, as
   combinations can be recombined continuously, and may offer a better
   theory of how cultural complexity and cultural systems emerge (see
   §3d). Also, it could explain, through the power of combinatorics, how
   cultural evolution can generate a never-ending stream of new variation.

   For a better understanding of the role of language and recombination in
   cumulative cultural evolution, future research needs to address several
   important questions, such as:
     * i.
       What are the combinatorial properties that allow a seemingly
       unbounded generation of diversity and complexity in human
       cumulative cultural evolution?
     * ii.
       What is the role of language, symbolism, and cognitive abilities in
       cumulative cultural evolution?
     * iii.
       Can all types of cultural change be understood in evolutionary
       terms (listed in table 1), or do we need additional theoretical
       frameworks?

(b) Developmental processes are directly involved in acquisition and
transmission

   Development here refers broadly to the processes that shape and modify
   the individual during its lifetime. In biological evolution,
   development is usually separated from the processes that transmit
   genetic traits and its evolution is studied in life-history theory,
   which emphasizes the role of trade-offs [81]. By contrast, in cultural
   evolution, development and transmission processes tend to be more
   intertwined, as they occur on the same time scale. On the one hand, an
   individual’s experience is shaped by sequential encounters with its
   surrounding cultural environment. On the other hand, the individual
   itself contributes to the makeup of that cultural environment.

   Relevant progress in our understanding of developmental processes in
   humans has been made in a variety of disciplines, such as developmental
   psychology, educational science and linguistics [48,49]. Several
   general findings from empirical research in these fields are relevant
   to cultural evolution. First and foremost, development is generally
   incremental and time-consuming, starting with learning simple features
   and elements that are later integrated into a functional practical or
   mental skill. This is obvious for advanced skills like mental
   arithmetic [82–84], and reading and writing, but also required for more
   basic skills (e.g. [82,85,86]).

   A second key finding is that traits are typically acquired through a
   combination of social interactions and individual efforts
   [48,49,87,88]. Thus, social and individual learning are operating
   together rather than being alternative strategies. Furthermore,
   research on development has also clearly established that there is an
   extensive behavioural and mental flexibility in humans. This allows
   humans to acquire a large range of skills, many of recent origin and
   not part of our prehistory, like reading and writing, agricultural
   practices, playing chess, and computer programming. Performance is
   generally strongly correlated to the amount of training, for both
   domain-specific and domain-general skills [89]. Thus, psychology and
   educational science suggest that when we see faithful copying over
   generations, this depends on substantial learning efforts among
   individuals. The situation is complicated by findings showing that
   learning and memory abilities themselves respond to training, and are
   thus partly cultural and subject to cultural evolution [48,89,90].

   Previous theoretical models of cultural evolution typically use
   simplified assumptions about individual development and rely on simple
   copying mechanisms and strategies for social learning [91–94], or treat
   social and individual learning as opposing alternatives [17,95], whose
   evolution is generally studied in the absence of a
   learning–reproduction trade-off (see [96] for how classical results are
   critically changed once the learning–reproduction trade-off is taken
   into account).

   It is thus becoming increasingly clear that future models should
   incorporate developmental processes, especially for traits that cannot
   be acquired in a single learning episode (because they are combinations
   of simpler traits or because they require individual improvement).
   These models should further be embedded into a proper life-history
   context so as to make all traits pertaining to learning co-evolutionary
   [97].

   Challenges and questions for future research:
     * i.
       How can developmental psychology and related fields inform cultural
       evolution research? For example, in the debate between the
       ‘California’ and the ‘Paris’ school on why cultural learning can be
       faithful to its source and maintained over generations, while
       single transmission events are error-prone [53,54,98,99],
       developmental psychology might explain faithful transmission in
       terms of sequential learning including efficient corrective
       feedback loops.
     * ii.
       What is the scope of cultural evolution in terms of mental
       abilities? To what extent are mental abilities and psychological
       mechanisms learnt from or influenced by the cultural environment
       [100,101], and thus subject to cultural evolution themselves [30]?
       Future models that combine developmental processes and cultural
       evolution may help to distinguish the roles of inborn factors,
       acquired traits and individual experience.
     * iii.
       How does learning depend on an individual’s lifetime and how has it
       co-evolved with life history?

(c) Different evolutionary outcomes and cultural fitness

   In biological evolution, the fate of a trait can be understood by
   considering the average reproductive success of all carriers of that
   trait [102,103]. It is common to use optimization and game theoretic
   approaches to study evolutionary endpoints (i.e. adaptations). By
   contrast, in cultural evolution there is no generally accepted
   formulation of cultural fitness [104] as the relationship between the
   individual and its traits is more complicated. Here, transmission is
   not tied to biological reproduction, can occur between arbitrary
   individuals, and the individual is not fixed with respect to the
   cultural traits it possesses and exhibits to others during its life.
   These differences have implications both for the outcome of evolution
   and for how cultural evolution should be theoretically explored
   [11,15,17,52]. In principle, anything that influences transmission,
   retention and use of cultural traits needs to be considered.

   For instance, traits that are contagious enough can spread and be
   maintained in a population even if they reduce the survival and/or
   biological reproduction of individuals [105–107]. Suppose lifestyle A
   produces more children than lifestyle B and that parental lifestyles
   are often transmitted to the children. However, children are also
   exposed to the alternative lifestyle B, which is more attractive (e.g.
   because it is easier to learn). This may be driven by a genetic or
   cultural bias for this lifestyle, and could result in B increasing in
   frequency compared to A. Figure 1 provides a numerical example. A
   complete analysis of cultural evolution scenarios of this kind requires
   exploration of both the evolution of lifestyles and the evolution of
   preferences for lifestyles [108].
   An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name
   is rstb20200259f01.jpg
   Open in a separate window
   Figure 1.

   A numerical example showing how a lifestyle associated with lower
   fertility could spread in cultural evolution (see §3c).

   In any human society, we find a range of both material and non-material
   culture serving the well-being, survival and reproduction of
   individuals or the group. However, we can also observe phenomena that
   are more difficult to interpret as adaptive in this way. We spend
   significant amounts of time learning to play musical instruments and
   chess. Often, our actions and beliefs do not even promote the goals
   they are aimed at, like when anti-vaxxers refuse medically motivated
   vaccinations in order to promote health [109].

   It is quite possible that concepts like adaptation and fitness in
   cultural evolution will not have equivalent and as straightforward
   meanings as they do in biological evolution. The complication is that
   individuals are subject to change during their lives, which can be
   illustrated by comparing a trait that transmits rather slowly to
   others, but tends to stay with an individual once it is acquired, with
   a trait that transmits quickly to other individuals, but is easily
   abandoned or replaced. The latter trait may be easy to learn, or has
   some immediate attraction, but is less productive. Which trait spreads
   can depend on trait content and thus may not be predictable by
   considering an elementary set of rules of transmission [110].

   It has been suggested that the fitness of cultural traits can be based
   on just the traits or free-floating memes [104]. While this can be a
   useful approach for certain questions, a general theory of cultural
   evolution cannot ignore the individual because of its active roll in
   acquiring, processing and exhibiting cultural traits [104]. This is one
   of the reasons that make it so tricky to find a useful concept of units
   of evolution in cultural evolution (a unit might be the single cultural
   trait or a set of traits, but also the carrier of a trait, etc.).

   Challenges and questions for future research:
     * i.
       Is it possible to provide a general theoretical account for the
       observed diversity of outcomes of human cultural evolution?
     * ii.
       How can we define and recognize cultural adaptations, at what level
       are they manifested, and how can we use them to identify useful
       units of cultural evolution?
     * iii.
       What could be a useful concept of fitness in cultural evolution,
       and, if it exists, how can it be used to study cultural evolution?

(d) Trait interactions, cultural systems and evolving evolutionary dynamics

   The facts that individuals acquire traits sequentially and that traits
   can interact may have important organizing effects. The resulting
   developmental path dependence (see §3b) can limit which traits an
   individual acquires, and so promote the evolution of cultural systems
   [22,55,66,111,112]. For instance, an individual might acquire a belief
   A about the world, which subsequently facilitates the acquisition of
   other beliefs that are consistent with A but leads to the rejection of
   beliefs that are not [113]. If, instead, the individual would first
   acquire an alternative belief B, then this could trigger the eventual
   acquisition of an entirely different belief system. Similar reasoning
   can apply to other categories of traits. In fact, there are many ways
   in which traits can interact and influence evolution. Traits may or may
   not operate well together (within or between individuals), they might
   express preferences towards other traits, and define goals the
   individual strives for that are better served by certain traits than
   others. Traits can also be clustered in space (e.g. co-occurrence of
   traits relevant for fishing near bodies of water) or time (e.g.
   seasonal occurrence of sets of traits), and may even influence social
   network structure, and thus lead to exposure to different sets of
   traits [62]. The fact that culture exists in the form of systems,
   contexts or structures of interrelated parts, manifested both in
   individuals and in groups of individuals, is generally recognized in
   the humanities and social sciences [22]. It is possible that many
   cultural phenomena can only be understood from an explicit systems
   perspective.

   Trait interactions could also have even more pronounced effects, and
   bring about changes to the evolutionary process itself, that is,
   important aspects of cultural evolution dynamics may themselves be
   results of cultural evolution rather than determined by genetic factors
   or external circumstances [22,114,115]. Examples of such changes in
   biological evolution are migration, mutation and sexual reproduction,
   which are called modifier traits. These traits have important
   consequences for the dynamics of biological evolution, but they are
   also products of that same evolution, thus resulting in
   counterintuitive feedbacks [116]. All items in table 1 are potentially
   subject to cultural evolution, and it has been suggested that cultural
   evolution itself can influence social learning abilities [1], efforts
   by senders’ and receivers’ willingness to change [114,117], and
   transmission pathways [62]. Culturally established goals could have a
   dramatic effect on the outcome of cultural evolution. Acerbi et al.
   [114] introduced the term regulatory traits for cultural traits that
   influence the dynamics of the evolutionary process and suggested that
   their evolution depends on their ability to directly or indirectly
   influence their own evolution.

   The organizing effects of interactions and feedbacks can also be seen
   in the broader perspective of evolutionary transitions. These are
   fundamental modifications to the evolutionary process, caused by
   evolution itself. Maynard Smith & Szathmáry [21] recognized several
   properties common to such transitions, which we can also find in human
   cultural evolution. The first property is that new ways of transmitting
   information are formed. Humans have invented a series of information
   technologies, like reading and writing, radio and television, databases
   and pocket calculators, which can store, as well as communicate or
   broadcast, cultural traits, and also help us think and make decisions.
   A second property of transitions is that smaller entities aggregate to
   form larger ones and that the smaller entities tend to differentiate.
   Humans form a diversity of societies that are conceivably different
   from those that existed at the dawn of human culture, with for instance
   complex political and social organizations, division of labour,
   individual specializations and long production chains, and organized
   transmission of cultural traits via institutions like schools (e.g.
   [5,118–120]).

   Challenges and questions for future research:
     * i.
       What new understanding can be gained from a systems approach that
       cannot be gained from considerations of simpler representations of
       culture?
     * ii.
       How can the evolution of cultural systems be explored
       theoretically? This requires formal descriptions of cultural
       systems, an understanding of trait relationships, and evolutionary
       modelling approaches that take into account that cultural systems
       exist and operate within and between individuals ([66], this
       issue).
     * iii.
       How do externalized information storage and processing affect
       cultural evolution?

4.  Concluding remarks

   Studying cultural evolution in an evolutionary framework has come a
   long way. The development of this research programme has proven
   invaluable to our understanding of many cultural phenomena. The many
   differences between cultural and biological evolution, while not
   invalidating an evolutionary approach, show that there is a rich
   research field with many potentially interesting avenues for future
   studies. The way mental representations are stored, recalled,
   transmitted and modified, and the active role the individual plays in
   all of these stages, leads to a level of complexity that may even
   require entirely new analytical and modelling approaches to be fully
   understood.

   We hope that the collection of ideas we have presented here have
   highlighted some of the complexity of cultural evolution, which occurs
   at different organizational levels, along different timelines, between
   the material and the immaterial, and the biotic and abiotic world.
   Clearly, a full understanding of culture requires interdisciplinary
   efforts. Fortunately, cultural evolution research has always been at
   home in a variety of disciplines. And on closer inspection, much work
   has been evolutionary at its core, even if the term was not explicitly
   used.

   The discussions at the Leiden meeting leading to this paper (see
   Acknowledgements) have emphasized the value of overcoming semantic
   barriers that exist across disciplines. Despite different historical
   motivations, perspectives and approaches to cultural evolution
   research, there are shared ambitions and overlapping questions. We
   would like to close this essay with three suggestions to strengthen the
   interdisciplinary approach and to counteract isolation between
   different schools of thought:

   Focusing on questions relevant to the social sciences and humanities.
   To strengthen interdisciplinary work, we believe it would be useful to
   address more of the cultural and social phenomena that are intensively
   studied within the humanities and the social sciences. Potential
   examples are tribalism, race and gender issues, knowledge resistance,
   segregation, social immobility, systems of belief, cooperation, trust
   and polarization. There has been a tendency to focus on general
   questions in cultural evolution modelling, such as the emergence,
   change, transmission and accumulation of cultural traits. By
   considering more specific phenomena, it should also be possible to
   generate new concrete and testable hypotheses. Perhaps one of the best
   examples of a productive interaction between cultural evolutionary
   theorising and empirical research, blending general and specific
   theories with in-depth knowledge about the phenomena, can be found in
   recent developments in language evolution [121].

   Acknowledging existing work in other fields. We also think that it is
   important to pay more attention to existing thinking and theory within
   the humanities and the social sciences, and also to make use of the
   wealth of existing empirical data on human culture. There are two
   aspects to this. One is that evolutionary thinking is not a novel
   concept in the humanities and social sciences, as we discussed above.
   The other is that many theories, including verbal, statistical and
   mathematical models, are genuinely evolutionary in our sense, without
   using the term evolution. Thus there are clear overlapping goals with
   cultural evolutionary research. This applies to both older verbal
   hypotheses and recent theoretical work. A few examples of the latter
   include: studies on social learning dynamics in evolutionary game
   theory in economics [122,123]; the dynamics of knowledge production and
   acquisition at the aggregate (population) level studied in
   macroeconomics [124–127]; and models of beliefs of agents studied in
   sociology [128,129]. Microeconomics has also adopted the cultural
   evolution framework, as introduced by Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman, and
   applies it to all sorts of questions [130,131]. An important next step
   in acknowledging existing research must be synthetic work. It has
   become increasingly clear that it is almost impossible to embrace all
   theories of cultural change that exist. There is a real need for
   synthetic work, to avoid reinvention, and to recognize both general and
   specific theories about cultural change that deserve to be further
   explored.

   Connecting disciplines. Finally, we suggest making use of knowledge
   from and cooperation with a few fields that are rarely mentioned in
   formal theoretical studies of cultural evolution. Two such fields that
   we have mentioned throughout this paper are developmental psychology
   and educational science. Together these fields have gathered important
   insights into individual development and social learning. Many of the
   scenarios described, and the interaction with individual learning,
   differ from assumptions and strategic thinking about social learning
   common in cultural evolution research. They also offer insight into
   nature–nurture issues, the scope of cultural evolution, and how mental
   abilities can be transmitted. Another field of potential interest is
   artificial intelligence and related fields in cognitive science, which
   hold many ideas about learning processes and cognitive abilities.

Acknowledgements

   This paper is a summary of discussions at the ‘Foundations of Cultural
   Evolution’ workshop in Leiden, Netherlands, in 2019, upon which this
   special issue is based. F.J.W. was one of the organizers. We also thank
   Pieter van den Berg, Eva Boon and Lucas Molleman for organizing the
   workshop and inviting us.

Data accessibility

   This article has no additional data.

Authors' contributions

   M.S., F.J. and M.E. wrote the paper, and all authors contributed to
   discussions and revisions.

Competing interests

   We declare we have no competing interests.

Funding

   M.S. was supported by an ARO grant to Erol Akçay (W911NF-17-1-0017).
   F.J. and M.E. were supported by grant no. 2015.0005 from the Knut and
   Alice Wallenberg Foundation.

References

   1. Henrich JP. 2015. The secret of our success. Princeton, NJ:
   Princeton University Press. [Google Scholar]
   2. van Schaik CP. 2016. The primate origins of human nature, 1st edn.
   Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. [Google Scholar]
   3. Boyd R, Richerson PJ. 1995. Why culture is common, but cultural
   evolution is rare. Proc. Br. Acad. 88, 77-93. [Google Scholar]
   4. Darwin C. 1859. The origin of species by means of natural selection
   (Reprinted by the Modern Library). New York, NY: Random House. [Google
   Scholar]
   5. Carneiro RL. 2003. Evolutionism in cultural anthropology: a critical
   history. Cambridge, MA: Westview Press. [Google Scholar]
   6. Gintis H. 2007. A framework for the unification of the behavioral
   sciences. Behav. Brain Sci. 30, 1-16. ( 10.1017/S0140525X07000581)
   [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   7. Hodgson GM. 2019. Evolutionary economics: its nature and future
   (Elements in evolutionary economics). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
   University Press. [Google Scholar]
   8. Laland KN, Brown GR.. 2011. Sense and nonsense: evolutionary
   perspectives on human behaviour, 2nd edn. New York, NY: Oxford
   University Press. [Google Scholar]
   9. Munro T. 1963. Evolution in the arts and other theories of culture
   history. J. Aesthetics Art Criticism 22, 75. [Google Scholar]
   10. Sanderson SK 1990. Social evolutionism: a critical history (Studies
   in social discontinuity). Oxford, UK: Blackwell. [Google Scholar]
   11. Mesoudi A 2011. Cultural evolution: how Darwinian theory can
   explain human culture and synthesize the social sciences. Chicago, IL:
   University of Chicago Press. [Google Scholar]
   12. Fisher R 1930. The genetical theory of natural selection. Oxford,
   UK: The Clarendon Press. [Google Scholar]
   13. Wright S. 1931. Evolution in mendelian populations. Genetics 16,
   97. ( 10.1093/genetics/16.2.97) [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef]
   [Google Scholar]
   14. Haldane JBS. 1932. The causes of evolution. London, UK: Longmans.
   [Google Scholar]
   15. Cavalli-Sforza LL, Feldman MW.. 1981. Cultural transmission and
   evolution: a quantitative approach (Monographs in population biology
   16). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. [PubMed] [Google
   Scholar]
   16. Lumsden CJ, Wilson EO.. 1981. Genes, mind, and culture: the
   coevolutionary process. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
   [Google Scholar]
   17. Boyd R, Richerson PJ.. 1985. Culture and the evolutionary process.
   Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. [Google Scholar]
   18. Campbell DT. 1965. Variation and selective retention in
   socio-cultural evolution. In Social change in developing areas: a
   reinterpretation of evolutionary theory (eds HR Barringer, GI
   Blanksten, RW Mack), pp. 19–49. Cambridge, MA: Schenkman.
   19. Jablonka E, Lamb MJ. 2014. Evolution in four dimensions, revised
   edition: genetic, epigenetic, behavioral, and symbolic variation in the
   history of life. New York, NY: MIT Press. [Google Scholar]
   20. Lewontin RC. 1970. The units of selection. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst.
   1, 1-18. ( 10.1146/annurev.es.01.110170.000245) [CrossRef] [Google
   Scholar]
   21. Maynard Smith J, Szathmáry E. 1995. The major evolutionary
   transitions. Nature 374, 227-232. ( 10.1038/374227a0) [PubMed]
   [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   22. Buskell A, Enquist M, Jansson F. 2019. A systems approach to
   cultural evolution. Palgrave Commun. 5, 131. (
   10.1057/s41599-019-0343-5) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   23. Szathmáry E, Maynard Smith J. 1997. From replicators to
   reproducers: the first major transitions leading to life. J. Theor.
   Biol. 187, 555-571. ( 10.1006/jtbi.1996.0389) [PubMed] [CrossRef]
   [Google Scholar]
   24. Mesoudi A. 2007. A Darwinian theory of cultural evolution can
   promote an evolutionary synthesis for the social sciences. Biol. Theory
   2, 263-275. ( 10.1162/biot.2007.2.3.263) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   25. Mesoudi A. 2017. Pursuing Darwin’s curious parallel: prospects for
   a science of cultural evolution. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114,
   7853-7860. ( 10.1073/pnas.1620741114) [PMC free article] [PubMed]
   [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   26. Nelson RR. 2007. Universal Darwinism and evolutionary social
   science. Biol. Phil. 22, 73-94. ( 10.1007/s10539-005-9005-7) [CrossRef]
   [Google Scholar]
   27. Creanza N, Kolodny O, Feldman MW. 2017. Cultural evolutionary
   theory: how culture evolves and why it matters. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
   USA 114, 7782-7789. ( 10.1073/pnas.1620732114) [PMC free article]
   [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   28. Henrich J, McElreath R. 2003. The evolution of cultural evolution.
   Evol. Anthropol. 12, 123-135. ( 10.1002/evan.10110) [CrossRef] [Google
   Scholar]
   29. Acerbi A 2019. Cultural evolution in the digital age. New York, NY:
   Oxford University Press. [Google Scholar]
   30. Heyes CM 2018. Cognitive gadgets: the cultural evolution of
   thinking. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
   [Google Scholar]
   31. Laland KN 2017. Darwin’s unfinished symphony: how culture explains
   the evolution of the human mind. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
   Press. [Google Scholar]
   32. Gelfand MJ, Kashima Y. 2015. Culture: advances in the science of
   culture and psychology. Curr. Opin. Psychol. 8, 1-7. (
   10.1016/j.copsyc.2015.12.011) [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   33. Kolodny O, Feldman MW, Creanza N. 2018. Bridging cultural gaps:
   interdisciplinary studies in human cultural evolution. Phil. Trans. R.
   Soc. B 373, 20170413. ( 10.1098/rstb.2017.0413) [PMC free article]
   [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   34. Whiten A, Ayala FJ, Feldman MW, Laland KN. 2017. The extension of
   biology through culture. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 7775-7781. (
   10.1073/pnas.1707630114) [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google
   Scholar]
   35. Whiten A, Hinde RA, Laland KN, Stringer CB. 2011. Culture evolves.
   Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 366, 938-948. ( 10.1098/rstb.2010.0372) [PMC
   free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   36. Weng L, Menczer F, Ahn Y-Y. 2013. Virality prediction and community
   structure in social networks. Sci. Rep. 3, 1-6. ( 10.1038/srep02522)
   [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   37. Centola D. 2010. The spread of behavior in an online social network
   experiment. Science 329, 1194-1197. ( 10.1126/science.1185231) [PubMed]
   [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   38. Aplin LM. 2019. Culture and cultural evolution in birds: a review
   of the evidence. Anim. Behav. 147, 179-187. (
   10.1016/j.anbehav.2018.05.001) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   39. Hoppitt W, Laland KN. 2013. Social learning: an introduction to
   mechanisms, methods, and models. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
   Press. [Google Scholar]
   40. Krützen M, Mann J, Heithaus MR, Connor RC, Bejder L, Sherwin WB.
   2005. Cultural transmission of tool use in bottlenose dolphins. Proc.
   Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 8939-8943. ( 10.1073/pnas.0500232102) [PMC
   free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   41. Leadbeater E, Chittka L. 2007. Social learning in insects—from
   miniature brains to consensus building. Curr. Biol. 17, R703-R713. (
   10.1016/j.cub.2007.06.012) [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   42. Rendell L, Whitehead H. 2001. Culture in whales and dolphins.
   Behav. Brain Sci. 24, 309-382. ( 10.1017/S0140525X0100396X) [PubMed]
   [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   43. Whiten A. 2019. Cultural evolution in animals. Annu. Rev. Ecol.
   Evol. Syst. 50, 1-22. ( 10.1146/annurev-ecolsys-110218-025040)
   [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   44. Atkinson QD, Gray RD. 2005. Curious parallels and curious
   connections—phylogenetic thinking in biology and historical
   linguistics. Syst. Biol. 54, 513-526. ( 10.1080/10635150590950317)
   [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   45. Mace R, Holden C. 2005. A phylogenetic approach to cultural
   evolution. Trends Ecol. Evol. 20, 116-121. (
   10.1016/j.tree.2004.12.002) [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   46. Gogarten JP, Townsend JP. 2005. Horizontal gene transfer, genome
   innovation and evolution. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 3, 679-687. (
   10.1038/nrmicro1204) [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   47. Tamariz M. 2019. Replication and emergence in cultural
   transmission. Phys. Life Rev. 30, 47-71. ( 10.1016/j.plrev.2019.04.004)
   [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   48. Bjorklund DF, Causey KB.. 2017. Children’s thinking: cognitive
   development and individual differences. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
   Publications. [Google Scholar]
   49. Hattie J. 2008. Visible learning: a synthesis of over 800
   meta-analyses relating to achievement, 1st edn. New York, NY: Taylor
   and Francis. [Google Scholar]
   50. Lew-Levy S, Reckin R, Lavi N, Cristóbal-Azkarate J, Ellis-Davies K.
   2017. How do hunter-gatherer children learn subsistence skills?: a
   meta-ethnographic review. Hum. Nat. 28, 367-394. (
   10.1007/s12110-017-9302-2) [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef]
   [Google Scholar]
   51. Enquist M, Strimling P, Eriksson K, Laland K, Sjöstrand J. 2010.
   One cultural parent makes no culture. Anim. Behav. 79, 1353-1362. (
   10.1016/j.anbehav.2010.03.009) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   52. Strimling P, Enquist M, Eriksson K. 2009. Repeated learning makes
   cultural evolution unique. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 13 870-13
   874. ( 10.1073/pnas.0903180106) [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef]
   [Google Scholar]
   53. Acerbi A, Mesoudi A. 2015. If we are all cultural Darwinians what’s
   the fuss about? Clarifying recent disagreements in the field of
   cultural evolution. Biol. Phil. 30, 481-503. (
   10.1007/s10539-015-9490-2) [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef]
   [Google Scholar]
   54. Henrich J, Boyd R. 2002. On modeling cognition and culture: why
   cultural evolution does not require replication of representations. J.
   Cogn. Cult. 2, 87-112. ( 10.1163/156853702320281836) [CrossRef] [Google
   Scholar]
   55. Claidière N, Scott-Phillips TC, Sperber D. 2014. How Darwinian is
   cultural evolution? Phil. Trans. R Soc. B 369, 20130368. (
   10.1098/rstb.2013.0368) [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google
   Scholar]
   56. Morin O. 2016. Reasons to be fussy about cultural evolution. Biol.
   Phil. 31, 447-458. ( 10.1007/s10539-016-9516-4) [PMC free article]
   [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   57. Sperber D 1996. Explaining culture: a naturalistic approach.
   Oxford, UK: Blackwell. [Google Scholar]
   58. Dean LG, Kendal RL, Schapiro SJ, Thierry B, Laland KN. 2012.
   Identification of the social and cognitive processes underlying human
   cumulative culture. Science 335, 1114-1118. ( 10.1126/science.1213969)
   [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   59. Pinker S 2015. Language, cognition, and human nature: selected
   articles. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. [Google Scholar]
   60. Smith K, Kirby S. 2008. Cultural evolution: implications for
   understanding the human language faculty and its evolution. Phil.
   Trans. R. Soc. B 363, 3591-3603. ( 10.1098/rstb.2008.0145) [PMC free
   article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   61. Morgan TJH et al. 2015. Experimental evidence for the co-evolution
   of hominin tool-making teaching and language. Nat. Commun. 6, 6029. (
   10.1038/ncomms7029) [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google
   Scholar]
   62. Smolla M, Akçay E. 2019. Cultural selection shapes network
   structure. Sci. Adv. 5, eaaw0609. ( 10.1126/sciadv.aaw0609) [PMC free
   article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   63. Heyes C. 2016. Who knows? Metacognitive social learning strategies.
   Trends Cogn. Sci. 20, 204-213. ( 10.1016/j.tics.2015.12.007) [PubMed]
   [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   64. Kendal RL, Coolen I, van Bergen Y, Laland KN. 2005. Trade-offs in
   the adaptive use of social and asocial learning. Adv. Study Behav. 35,
   333-379. ( 10.1016/S0065-3454(05)35008-X) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   65. Laland KN. 2004. Social learning strategies. Anim. Learn. Behav.
   32, 4-14. ( 10.3758/BF03196002) [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   66. Jansson F, Aguilar E, Acerbi A, Enquist M. 2021. Modelling cultural
   systems and selective filters. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 376, 20200045. (
   10.1098/rstb.2020.0045) [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google
   Scholar]
   67. Richerson PJ, Boyd R. 2005. Not by genes alone: how culture
   transformed human evolution, 3rd edn. Chicago, IL: University of
   Chicago Press. [Google Scholar]
   68. Fehr E, Gächter S. 2002. Altruistic punishment in humans. Nature
   415, 137-140. ( 10.1038/415137a) [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   69. Ostrom E, Walker J, Gardner R. 1992. Covenants with and without a
   sword: self-governance is possible. Am. Political Sci. Rev. 86,
   404-417. ( 10.2307/1964229) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   70. Yamagishi T. 1986. The provision of a sanctioning system as a
   public good. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 51, 110-116. (
   10.1037/0022-3514.51.1.110) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   71. Kahneman D 2011. Thinking, fast and slow, 1st edn. New York, NY:
   Farrar, Straus and Giroux. [Google Scholar]
   72. Basalla G 1988. The evolution of technology. Cambridge, UK:
   Cambridge University Press. [Google Scholar]
   73. Mesoudi A. 2008. Foresight in cultural evolution. Biol. Phil. 23,
   243-255. ( 10.1007/s10539-007-9097-3) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   74. Simonton DK. 1995. Foresight in insight? A Darwinian answer. In The
   nature of insight (eds RJ Sternberg, JE Davidson), pp. 465–494. New
   York, NY: MIT Press.
   75. Öhman A, Lewis M, Haviland-Jones JM. 2000. Fear and anxiety:
   evolutionary, cognitive, and clinical perspectives. In Handbook of
   emotions (eds M Lewis, JM Haviland-Jones), pp. 573–593. New York, NY:
   The Guilford Press.
   76. Perreault C, Moya C, Boyd R. 2012. A Bayesian approach to the
   evolution of social learning. Evol. Hum. Behav. 33, 449-459. (
   10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2011.12.007) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   77. Shennan S 2002. Genes, memes, and human history: Darwinian
   archaeology and cultural evolution. London, UK: Thames & Hudson.
   [Google Scholar]
   78. Enquist M, Ghirlanda S, Eriksson K. 2011. Modelling the evolution
   and diversity of cumulative culture. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 366,
   412-423. ( 10.1098/rstb.2010.0132) [PMC free article] [PubMed]
   [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   79. Kolodny O, Creanza N, Feldman MW. 2015. Evolution in leaps: the
   punctuated accumulation and loss of cultural innovations. Proc. Natl
   Acad. Sci. USA 112, E6762-E6769. ( 10.1073/pnas.1520492112) [PMC free
   article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   80. Lewis HM, Laland KN. 2012. Transmission fidelity is the key to the
   build-up of cumulative culture. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 367, 2171-2180.
   ( 10.1098/rstb.2012.0119) [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef]
   [Google Scholar]
   81. Stearns SC 1992. The evolution of life histories. New York, NY:
   Oxford University Press. [Google Scholar]
   82. Carey S 2011. The origin of concepts. New York, NY: Oxford
   University Press. [Google Scholar]
   83. Dehaene S. 2009. Origins of mathematical intuitions: the case of
   arithmetic. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 1156, 232-259. (
   10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04469.x) [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   84. Wynn K. 1992. Children’s acquisition of the number words and the
   counting system. Cognit. Psychol. 24, 220-251. (
   10.1016/0010-0285(92)90008-P) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   85. Friedman SL, Scholnick EK. 2014. The developmental psychology of
   planning: why, how, and when do we plan? Hoboken, NJ: Taylor and
   Francis. [Google Scholar]
   86. Nelson K, Gruendel J. 1981. Generalized event representations:
   basic building blocks of cognitive development. In Advances in
   Developmental Psychology vol. 1 (eds ME Lamb, AL Brown), pp. 131–158.
   Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
   87. Nelson K. 1999. Language in cognitive development: emergence of the
   mediated mind. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. [Google
   Scholar]
   88. Vygotsky LS. 1978. Mind in society: the development of higher
   psychological processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
   [Google Scholar]
   89. Ericsson KA, Charness N, Feltovich PJ, Hoffman RR eds. 2006. The
   Cambridge handbook of expertise and expert performance. Cambridge, UK:
   Cambridge University Press. [Google Scholar]
   90. Gobet F, Charness N. 2018. Expertise in chess. In The Cambridge
   handbook of expertise and expert performance (eds KA Ericsson, RR
   Hoffman, A Kozbelt, AM Williams), 2nd edn, pp. 597–615. Cambridge, UK:
   Cambridge University Press.
   91. Enquist M, Eriksson K, Ghirlanda S. 2007. Critical social learning:
   a solution to Rogers’s paradox of nonadaptive culture. Am. Anthropol.
   109, 727-734. ( 10.1525/aa.2007.109.4.727) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   92. Rendell L, et al.. 2010. Why copy others? Insights from the social
   learning strategies tournament. Science 328, 208-213. (
   10.1126/science.1184719) [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google
   Scholar]
   93. Rendell L, Fogarty L, Laland KN. 2010. Rogers’ paradox recast and
   resolved: population structure and the evolution of social learning
   strategies. Evol. Int. J. Org. Evol. 64, 534-548. (
   10.1111/j.1558-5646.2009.00817.x) [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   94. Smolla M, Gilman RT, Galla T, Shultz S. 2015. Competition for
   resources can explain patterns of social and individual learning in
   nature. Proc. R. Soc. B 282, 20151405. ( 10.1098/rspb.2015.1405) [PMC
   free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   95. Rogers AR. 1988. Does biology constrain culture. Am. Anthropol. 90,
   819-831. ( 10.1525/aa.1988.90.4.02a00030) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   96. Wakano JY, Miura C. 2014. Trade-off between learning and
   exploitation: the pareto-optimal versus evolutionarily stable learning
   schedule in cumulative cultural evolution. Theor. Popul. Biol. 91,
   37-43. ( 10.1016/j.tpb.2013.09.004) [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google
   Scholar]
   97. Kaplan H, Hill K, Lancaster J, Hurtado AM. 2000. A theory of human
   life history evolution: diet, intelligence, and longevity. Evol.
   Anthropol. 9, 30. (
   10.1002/1520-6505(2000)9:4<156::AID-EVAN5>3.0.CO;2-7) [CrossRef]
   [Google Scholar]
   98. Buskell A. 2017. What are cultural attractors? Biol. Phil. 32,
   377-394. ( 10.1007/s10539-017-9570-6) [PMC free article] [PubMed]
   [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   99. Sperber D, Hirschfeld LA. 2004. The cognitive foundations of
   cultural stability and diversity. Trends Cogn. Sci. 8, 40-46. (
   10.1016/j.tics.2003.11.002) [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   100. Elman JL, Bates EA, Johnson MH, Karmiloff-Smith A, Plunkett K,
   Parisi D. 1998. Rethinking innateness: a connectionist perspective on
   development, vol. 10. New York, NY: MIT Press. [Google Scholar]
   101. Karmiloff-Smith BA. 1994. Beyond modularity: a developmental
   perspective on cognitive science. Int. J. Lang. Commun. Disord. 29,
   95-105. ( 10.3109/13682829409041485) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   102. Haig D. 2012. The strategic gene. Biol. Phil. 27, 461-479. (
   10.1007/s10539-012-9315-5) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   103. Hamilton WD. 1963. The evolution of altruistic behavior. Am. Nat.
   97, 354-356. ( 10.1086/497114) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   104. Ramsey G, De Block A. 2017. Is cultural fitness hopelessly
   confused? Br. J. Phil. Sci. 68, 305-328. ( 10.1093/bjps/axv047)
   [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   105. Anderton DL, Tsuya NO, Bean LL, Mineau GP. 1987. Intergenerational
   transmission of relative fertility and life course patterns. Demography
   24, 467. ( 10.2307/2061386) [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   106. Boyd R, Richerson PJ. 1976. A simple dual inheritance model of the
   conflict between social and biological evolution. Zygon 11, 254-262. (
   10.1111/j.1467-9744.1976.tb00285.x) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   107. Campbell DT. 1975. On the conflicts between biological and social
   evolution and between psychology and moral tradition. Am. Psychol. 30,
   1103-1126. ( 10.1037/0003-066X.30.12.1103) [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google
   Scholar]
   108. Kolk M, Cownden D, Enquist M. 2014. Correlations in fertility
   across generations: can low fertility persist? Proc. R. Soc. B 281,
   20132561. ( 10.1098/rspb.2013.2561) [PMC free article] [PubMed]
   [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   109. Dubé E, Laberge C, Guay M, Bramadat P, Roy R, Bettinger JA. 2013.
   Vaccine hesitancy: an overview. Hum. Vaccines Immunotherapeutics 9,
   1763-1773. ( 10.4161/hv.24657) [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef]
   [Google Scholar]
   110. Claidière N, André J-B. 2012. The transmission of genes and
   culture: a questionable analogy. Evol. Biol. 39, 12-24. (
   10.1007/s11692-011-9141-8) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   111. Goldberg A, Stein SK. 2018. Beyond social contagion: associative
   diffusion and the emergence of cultural variation. Am. Soc. Rev. 83,
   897-932. ( 10.1177/0003122418797576) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   112. Yeh DJ, Fogarty L, Kandler A. 2019. Cultural linkage: the
   influence of package transmission on cultural dynamics. Proc. R. Soc. B
   286, 20191951. ( 10.1098/rspb.2019.1951) [PMC free article] [PubMed]
   [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   113. Festinger L 1957. A theory of cognitive dissonance, vol. 2.
   Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. [Google Scholar]
   114. Acerbi A, Ghirlanda S, Enquist M. 2014. Regulatory traits:
   cultural influences on cultural evolution. In Evolution, complexity and
   artificial life (eds S Cagnoni, M Mirolli, Villani), pp. 135–147.
   Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
   115. Kolodny O, Creanza N, Feldman MW. 2016. Game-changing innovations:
   how culture can change the parameters of its own evolution and induce
   abrupt cultural shifts. PLoS Comput. Biol. 12, e1005302. (
   10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005302) [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef]
   [Google Scholar]
   116. Altenberg L, Feldman MW. 1987. Selection, generalized transmission
   and the evolution of modifier genes. I. The reduction principle.
   Genetics 117, 559-572. ( 10.1093/genetics/117.3.559) [PMC free article]
   [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   117. Ghirlanda S, Enquist M, Nakamaru M. 2006. Cultural evolution
   develops its own rules. Curr. Anthropol. 47, 1027-1034. (
   10.1086/508696) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   118. Richerson P et al. 2016. Cultural group selection plays an
   essential role in explaining human cooperation: a sketch of the
   evidence. Behav. Brain Sci. 39, e30. ( 10.1017/S0140525X1400106X)
   [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   119. Scarre C (ed). 2005. The human past: world prehistory & the
   development of human societies. London, UK: Thames & Hudson. [Google
   Scholar]
   120. Turchin P. 2016. Ultrasociety: how 10.000 years of war made humans
   the greatest cooperators on earth. Chaplin, CT: Beresta Books. [Google
   Scholar]
   121. Croft W. 2000. Explaining language change: an evolutionary
   approach. Harlow, UK: Longman. [Google Scholar]
   122. Sandholm WH. 2011. Population games and evolutionary dynamics
   (Economic learning and social evolution). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
   [Google Scholar]
   123. Schlag KH. 1998. Why imitate, and if so, how? A boundedly rational
   approach to multi-armed bandits. J. Econ. Theory 78, 130-156. (
   10.1006/jeth.1997.2347) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   124. Galor O, Weil DN. 2000. Population, technology, and growth: from
   Malthusian stagnation to the demographic transition and beyond. Am.
   Econ. Rev. 90, 806-828. ( 10.1257/aer.90.4.806) [CrossRef] [Google
   Scholar]
   125. Reiter S. 2012. Knowledge, discovery and growth. In Coordination
   theory and collaboration technology (eds GM Olson, TW Malone, JB
   Smith), pp. 193–260. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
   126. Romer PM. 1990. Endogenous technological change. J. Political
   Econ. 98, S71-S102. ( 10.1086/261725) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   127. Romer PM. 1994. The origins of endogenous growth. J. Econ.
   Perspect. 8, 3-22. ( 10.1257/jep.8.1.3) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   128. DeGroot MH. 1974. Reaching a consensus. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 69,
   118-121. ( 10.1080/01621459.1974.10480137) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   129. Friedkin NE, Proskurnikov AV, Tempo R, Parsegov SE. 2016. Network
   science on belief system dynamics under logic constraints. Science 354,
   321-326. ( 10.1126/science.aag2624) [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google
   Scholar]
   130. Bisin A, Verdier T. 2000. A model of cultural transmission, voting
   and political ideology. Eur. J. Political Econ. 16, 5-29. (
   10.1016/S0176-2680(99)00045-2) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
   131. Bisin A, Verdier T. 2001. The economics of cultural transmission
   and the dynamics of preferences. J. Econ. Theory 97, 298-319. (
   10.1006/jeth.2000.2678) [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     __________________________________________________________________

   Articles from Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:
   Biological Sciences are provided here courtesy of The Royal Society
     __________________________________________________________________

Other Formats

     * PubReader
     * PDF (441K)

Actions

     * (BUTTON) Cite
     *

   (BUTTON) Collections
   Add to Collections
     * ( ) Create a new collection
     * (*) Add to an existing collection

   Name your collection: ____________________
   Name must be less than characters
   Choose a collection:
   Unable to load your collection due to an error
   Please try again
   (BUTTON) Add (BUTTON) Cancel

        Share

     *
     *
     * (BUTTON)
       Permalink
       https://www.ncbi.nlm (BUTTON) Copy

        RESOURCES

     * (BUTTON) Similar articles
     * (BUTTON) Cited by other articles
     * (BUTTON) Links to NCBI Databases

   (BUTTON) [x]
   Cite
   (BUTTON) Copy Download .nbib .nbib
   Format: [NLM]

   Follow NCBI

   Connect with NLM
     *
     *
     *

   National Library of Medicine
   8600 Rockville Pike
   Bethesda, MD 20894

   Web Policies
   FOIA
   HHS Vulnerability Disclosure

   Help
   Accessibility
   Careers
     * NLM
     * NIH
     * HHS
     * USA.gov
