   #RSS

   Menu

Research Communities by Springer Nature

   Search ____________________ (BUTTON) Search
     * Register
     * Sign In

     * Home
     * (BUTTON)
       Health & Clinical Research
          + Biomedical Research
          + General & Internal Medicine
          + Healthcare and Nursing
          + Paediatrics, Reproductive Medicine & Geriatrics
          + Pharmacy & Pharmacology
          + Public Health
          + Surgery
     * (BUTTON)
       Humanities & Social Sciences
          + Arts and Humanities
          + Behavioural Sciences and Psychology
          + Business and Management
          + Economics
          + Education
          + Law, Politics & International Studies
          + Philosophy & Religion
          + Social Sciences
     * (BUTTON)
       Life Sciences
          + Agricultural and Food Science
          + Anatomy and Physiology
          + Bioengineering and Biotechnology
          + Cancer
          + Cell and Molecular Biology
          + Ecology and Evolution
          + Genetics and Genomics
          + Immunology
          + Microbiology
          + Neuroscience
          + Plant Science
          + Zoology & Veterinary Science
     * (BUTTON)
       Mathematics, Physical & Applied Sciences
          + Astronomy
          + Chemistry
          + Civil Engineering
          + Computational Sciences
          + Earth and Environment
          + Electrical & Electronic Engineering
          + Materials
          + Mathematical and Computational Engineering applications
          + Mathematics
          + Mechanical Engineering
          + Physics
          + Statistics
     * Protocols and Methods
     * Research Data
     * Sustainability
     * About the Communities
     * Communities Guidelines
     * How do I create a post?

   Register Sign In

    1. ← Back to Behind the Paper
    2.
    3. The origin and evolution of woolly rhinoceros in the view of
       ancient DNA

   Springer Nature
   Behind the Paper

The origin and evolution of woolly rhinoceros in the view of ancient DNA

   Woolly rhinoceros is one of the most popular species of the Ice Age,
   which has been attracting great interests from both the scientific
   community and the public. In recent years, technical advances in
   ancient DNA have provided powerful tools for exploring the evolution of
   this extinct star species.
   Published Oct 11, 2023
   Go to the profile of Junxia Yuan
   Junxia Yuan and Guilian Sheng
   2 contributors
   Like
   Go to the profile of Jennifer Harman
   Go to the profile of India Ambler
   Liked by Jennifer Harman and 1 other
   0

Read the paper

   BioMed Central
   BioMed Central BioMed Central

   Ancient mitogenomes reveal a high maternal genetic diversity of
   Pleistocene woolly rhinoceros in Northern China - BMC Ecology and
   Evolution

   Background Woolly rhinoceros (Coelodonta antiquitatis) is a typical
   indicator of cold-stage climate that was widely distributed in Northern
   Hemisphere during the Middle-Late Pleistocene. Although a plethora of
   fossils have been excavated from Northern China, their phylogenetic
   status, intraspecific diversity and phylogeographical structure are
   still vague. Results In the present study, we generated four
   mitogenomes from Late Pleistocene woolly rhinoceros in Northern China
   and compared them with published data. Bayesian and network analyses
   indicate that the analyzed individuals contain at least four maternal
   haplogroups, and Chinese samples fall in three of them. One of our
   samples belongs to a previously unidentified early diverging clade
   (haplogroup D), which separated from other woolly rhinoceros around
   0.57 Ma (95% CI: 0.76–0.41 Ma). The timing of this clade’s origin
   coincides with the first occurrence of woolly rhinoceros, which are
   thought to have evolved in Europe. Our other three samples cluster in
   haplogroup C, previously only identified from one specimen from Wrangel
   Island (ND030) and initially considered to be an isolated clade.
   Herein, our findings suggest that ND030 is likely descended from a
   northward dispersal of the individuals carrying haplogroup C from
   Northern China. Additionally, Chinese woolly rhinoceros specimens
   exhibit higher nucleotide diversity than those from Siberia. Conclusion
   Our findings highlight Northern China as a possible refugium and a key
   evolution center of the Pleistocene woolly rhinoceros.

   The rhino family once evolved into at least 100 species, inhabited from
   Africa across Eurasia to America, while only five critically endangered
   species surviving at present. Among the extinct rhino species, woolly
   rhinoceros (Coelodonta antiquitatis) is the most well-known one, which
   became extinct at the end of the Late Pleistocene. Woolly rhinoceros is
   an advanced species of the genus Coelodonta. The earliest
   representative of this genus, Coelodonta thibetana (~3.7 million years
   ago, Ma), originated in Qing-Tibetan Plateau, Southwestern China, then
   gradually evolved into different cold-adapt forms in Northern China
   since the start of Ice Age. Woolly rhinoceros is generally suggested as
   a typical indicator taxa of cold environments, and once widely
   distributed in Northern Eurasia during the Late Pleistocene. Unlike
   mammoth, it failed to cross the Bering Land Bridge from Eurasia into
   North America.

   Figure 1. Parts of unearthed woolly rhinoceros remains from Ulanmulun
   Paleolithic site, Inner Mongolia, Northern China. Credit: Lei Bao

   Northern China is famous for “Mammuthus-Coelodonta faunas” during the
   Late Pleistocene, and abundant woolly rhinoceros fossil materials have
   been excavated from the Late Pleistocene strata in this region. Given
   the early members of the genus Coelodonta originated in Northern China
   and numerous woolly rhinoceros remains excavated in this region,
   Northern China holds a crucial importance in the evolutionary history
   of this genus. Paleontologists carried out a series of exploration on
   fossil materials of Coelodonta in terms of morphological analyses, and
   previously proposed that Chinese woolly rhinoceros possibly descended
   from its Siberian relatives.

   Figure 2. Qinggang County, Heilongjiang Province——one of the most
   important fossil localities of “Mammuthus-Coelodonta faunas” in China.
   Credit: Bo Xiao

   In recent years, the rapid development of ancient DNA technologies,
   especially the metagenomic technology, have greatly increased the
   length of obtained sequences, making it possible to retrieve whole
   genomes from fossil materials. Until present, the outcomes of
   paleogenomic studies have fundamentally changed our understanding of
   the evolutionary history of many extinct/extant species. Especially,
   woolly mammoth, as one of the iconic members of
   “Mammuthus-Coelodonta faunas”, has become a model species for ancient
   DNA study due to its widespread distribution in Northern Hemisphere,
   while woolly rhinoceroses has received far less attention in the
   molecular level.

   Our team has been dedicated to DNA studies of
   Chinese Pleistocene-Holocene vertebrates over the past two decades,
   trying to explore the evolutionary history of the analyzed populations.
   We have focused on members of “Mammuthus-Coelodonta faunas” from
   Northern China, such as woolly mammoth, straight-tusked elephant,
   steppe bison, Ovodov horse, Przewalski׳s horse, red deer, roe deer,
   tiger, and cave hyenas as well. Molecular studies suggested several
   ancient Chinese populations showed close relationship to their Siberian
   relatives. With regards to woolly rhinoceros, where did the Chinese
   woolly rhinoceros come from? What is the exact phylogenetic status of
   the Chinese woolly rhinoceros from a genetic perspective? How about the
   genetic diversity level of Chinese individuals? To figure out problem
   solving possibilities, we carried out ancient DNA study on Chinese
   woolly rhinoceros individuals at about ten years ago. Unfortunately,
   only several fragment sequences were obtained from the analyzed samples
   at that time. However, the initial results and context of our previous
   ancient DNA studies on other Pleistocene mammals greatly sparked our
   interest in studying the genetic evolution of woolly rhinoceros.

   Figure 3. Salawusu, Inner Mongolia, Northern China——with a high
   proportion of woolly rhinoceros fossils from the Late Pleistocene
   strata in this region. Credit: Taogetongqimuge

   With help of our collaborators, we collected Late Pleistocene woolly
   rhinoceros remains from seven locations distributed in Northern China.
   We reconstructed the maternal phylogenetic trees based on the newly
   obtained mitochondrial genomes and previous published data using
   Bayesian and network analyses. Surprisingly, we found three Chinese
   samples cluster with one Wrangel Island sample and form a distinct
   maternal clade that previously proposed as an isolated lineage. Another
   surprise comes from the appearance of the oldest mitochondrial lineage
   of woolly rhinoceroses in Inner Mongolia, China. Moreover, the Late
   Pleistocene woolly rhinoceros individuals in Northern China have
   relatively high maternal genetic diversity compared with their Siberian
   relatives.

   Figure 4. Xinbarhu Left Banner, Inner Mongolia, Northern China——the
   known habitat of the basal woolly rhinoceros lineage. Credit: Longmei
   Bao

   In summary, our new genetic data not only indicates the surprising
   result that Northern China could be an important evolutionary center
   for woolly rhinoceroses during the Pleistocene, but also suggests that
   this famous extinct rhino possibly originated in this region rather
   than in Europe that derived from fossil records. Although our
   preliminary study has only uncovered the tip of the iceberg on the
   evolutionary history of this rhino species, our findings herein
   highlight that ancient DNA sequences from Chinese individuals are very
   important for revealing the full picture of the evolution of woolly
   rhinoceros, which will also have the enlightenment significance for
   exploring the evolutionary history of the other members of
   “Mammuthus-Coelodonta faunas” under the influence of global climate and
   environmental changes in Quaternary.
   Go to the profile of Junxia Yuan +1
   Multiple Contributors
   Junxia Yuan and Guilian Sheng
   View all
   (BUTTON) ×

Contributors

Author

   Go to the profile of Junxia Yuan

Junxia Yuan

   Dr., China University of Geosciences (Wuhan)
   Follow

Contributing author

   Go to the profile of Guilian Sheng

Guilian Sheng (She/Her)

   Prof., China University of Geosciences(Wuhan)
   Follow

Please sign in or register for FREE

   If you are a registered user on Research Communities by Springer
   Nature, please sign in
   Sign In Register

Subscribe to the Topic

   Ecology
   Life Sciences > Biological Sciences > Ecology
     * BMC Ecology and Evolution BMC Ecology and Evolution

BMC Ecology and Evolution
       An open access, peer-reviewed journal interested in all aspects of
       ecological and evolutionary biology.
       More about the journal

Related Collections

   With collections, you can get published faster and increase your
   visibility.

Agroecology: protecting, restoring, and promoting biodiversity

   The global food system is the predominant driver of biodiversity loss.
   Food System Impacts on Biodiversity Loss, a 2021 Chatham House report,
   supported by the UN Environment Programme (UNEP) and Compassion in
   World Farming, estimates that agriculture alone is the main threat to
   86% of the 28,000 species at risk of extinction. To protect, restore
   and promote biodiversity, there is an increasing need to transition
   towards more sustainable and resilient agri-food systems. To highlight
   this issue and support the United Nation’s Sustainable Development
   Goals (SGDs) 2: Zero hunger, 6: Clean water and sanitation, 12:
   Sustainable consumption and production, 13: Climate action, 14: Life
   below water, 15: Life on land, and 17: Partnerships for the goals, BMC
   Ecology and Evolution has launched this collection to bring together
   research on: · the development and implementation of sustainable
   agricultural practices that promote healthy ecosystems, · upscaling
   agroecological practices, · the impact of agroecology practices on
   pollinators, · the role of consumers in agro-ecological food systems, ·
   matter and energy flows in agroecosystems, · agroecology practices and
   soil management, · the ecological management of plagues and diseases, ·
   ecological restoration in agricultural landscapes, · the possible use
   of agroecology to achieve carbon neutrality, and agroforestry.
   (BUTTON) Show More

   Publishing Model: Open Access

   Deadline: Dec 27, 2023
   Explore this collection

Paleoecology of extinct species

   Paleoecological studies offer captivating glimpses into long-lost
   worlds. With recent technological advances, including new imaging and
   DNA sequencing techniques, researchers are providing an increasingly
   clear window to the past. BMC Ecology and Evolution has launched this
   Collection to attract papers from this multidisciplinary field. The
   Collection welcomes research: using micro- and macro fossils to study
   the paleoecology and palaeontology, on the interactions between extinct
   organisms and their environment over a variety of spatial and temporal
   scales, using histology, imaging, chemical analysis, biomechanical
   modeling techniques and other relevant approaches to unlock information
   within fossils, using sedimentary ancient DNA (e.g. metabarcoding,
   metagenomics, and target genome capturing) to gain paleoenvironmental/
   paleoecological insights applying niche modeling, species distribution
   modeling, and spatiotemporal modeling to investigate the distribution
   ranges and population sizes for extinct species.
   (BUTTON) Show More

   Publishing Model: Open Access

   Deadline: Dec 06, 2023
   Explore this collection

Recommended Content

   Behind the Paper

Bacteria provide a shuttle service for Type III Secretion System effectors

   Bacteria provide a shuttle service for Type III Secretion System
   effectors

   Behind the Paper

Driving and suppressing the human language network using large language
models

   Driving and suppressing the human language network using large language
   models

   Behind the Paper

Wetland carbon dynamics and global warming

   Wetland carbon dynamics and global warming

   Behind the Paper

Nanosensor Detection of Reactive Oxygen and Nitrogen Species Leakage in
Frustrated Phagocytosis of Nanofibers

   Nanosensor Detection of Reactive Oxygen and Nitrogen Species Leakage in
   Frustrated Phagocytosis of Nanofibers

   Behind the Paper

T-cell stimulating vaccines empower CD3 bispecific antibody therapy in solid
tumors

   T-cell stimulating vaccines empower CD3 bispecific antibody therapy in
   solid tumors
   (BUTTON)

Share this post

   Choose a social network to share with, or copy the shortened URL to
   share elsewhere

Share with...

   Twitter
   Facebook
   LinkedIn
   WhatsApp
   Email

...or copy the link

   https://go.nature.co
   The origin and evolution of woolly rhinoceros in the view of ancient
   DNA

   communities.springernature.com

The origin and evolution of woolly rhinoceros in the view of ancient DNA

   Woolly rhinoceros is one of the most popular species of the Ice Age,
   which has been attracting great interests from both the scientific
   community and the public. In recent years, technical advances in
   ancient DNA have provided powerful tools for exploring the evolution of
   this extinct star species.
   This is a representation of how your post may appear on social media.
   The actual post will vary between social networks

   This community is not edited and does not necessarily reflect the views
   of Springer Nature. Springer Nature makes no representations,
   warranties or guarantees, whether express or implied, that the content
   on this community is accurate, complete or up to date, and to the
   fullest extent permitted by law all liability is excluded.
     * Website terms of use
     * Online privacy notice
     * Cookie policy
     * Report content

   Copyright © 2024 Springer Nature All rights reserved. Powered by
   Zapnito.
   Research Communities by Springer Nature

Cookies

   We use cookies to ensure the functionality of our website, to
   personalize content and advertising, to provide social media features,
   and to analyze our traffic. If you allow us to do so, we also inform
   our social media, advertising and analysis partners about your use of
   our website. You can decide for yourself which categories you want to
   deny or allow. Please note that based on your settings not all
   functionalities of the site are available.

   Further information can be found in our privacy policy.
   (BUTTON) Learn more and customise
   (BUTTON) Reject All (BUTTON) Accept All
   (BUTTON) ×

Cookie Control

   Customise your preferences for any tracking technology

   The following allows you to customize your consent preferences for any
   tracking technology used to help us achieve the features and activities
   described below. To learn more about how these trackers help us and how
   they work, refer to the cookie policy. You may review and change your
   preferences at any time.
   See the full cookie policy See the full privacy policy
   (BUTTON) Reject All (BUTTON) Accept All
   [X] Strictly Necessary More information

   These trackers are used for activities that are strictly necessary to
   operate or deliver the service you requested from us and, therefore, do
   not require you to consent.
   [ ] Advertising More information

   These trackers help us to deliver personalized marketing content and to
   operate, serve and track ads.
   [ ] Social & Targeting More information

   These trackers help us to deliver personalized marketing content to you
   based on your behaviour and to operate, serve and track social
   advertising.
   [ ] Measurement More information

   These trackers help us to measure traffic and analyze your behaviour
   with the goal of improving our service.
   [ ] Experience Enhancements More information

   These trackers help us to provide a personalized user experience by
   improving the quality of your preference management options, and by
   enabling the interaction with external networks and platforms.
   (BUTTON) Save and continue →
