   (BUTTON) Back to Top Skip to main content

   U.S. flag

   An official website of the United States government
   (BUTTON) Here's how you know
   Dot gov

   The .gov means it’s official.
   Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing
   sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site.
   Https

   The site is secure.
   The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website
   and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted
   securely.

   NIH NLM Logo
   Log in (BUTTON) Show account info
   (BUTTON) Close

Account

   Logged in as:
   username
     * Dashboard
     * Publications
     * Account settings
     * Log out

   Access keys NCBI Homepage MyNCBI Homepage Main Content Main Navigation

   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   Search PMC Full-Text Archive ____________________ (BUTTON) Search in
   PMC
     * Advanced Search
     * User Guide

   (BUTTON)

     * Journal List
     * Springer Open Choice
     * PMC8894210

Other Formats

     * PubReader
     * PDF (648K)

Actions

     * (BUTTON) Cite
     *

   (BUTTON) Collections
   Add to Collections
     * ( ) Create a new collection
     * (*) Add to an existing collection

   Name your collection: ____________________
   Name must be less than characters
   Choose a collection:
   Unable to load your collection due to an error
   Please try again
   (BUTTON) Add (BUTTON) Cancel

        Share

     *
     *
     * (BUTTON)
       Permalink
       https://www.ncbi.nlm (BUTTON) Copy

        RESOURCES

     * (BUTTON) Similar articles
     * (BUTTON) Cited by other articles
     * (BUTTON) Links to NCBI Databases

     * Journal List
     * Springer Open Choice
     * PMC8894210

   As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion
   in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
   the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health.
   Learn more: PMC Disclaimer | PMC Copyright Notice

   Logo of springeropen
   History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences

   Hist Philos Life Sci. 2022; 44(1): 9.
   Published online 2022 Mar 3. doi: 10.1007/s40656-022-00483-1
   PMCID: PMC8894210
   PMID: 35239015

Biological constraints as norms in evolution

   Mathilde Tahar^ corresponding author ^

Mathilde Tahar

   ERRAPHIS, Université Toulouse II - Jean Jaurès, Toulouse, France
   Find articles by Mathilde Tahar
   Author information Article notes Copyright and License information PMC
   Disclaimer
   ERRAPHIS, Université Toulouse II - Jean Jaurès, Toulouse, France
   Mathilde Tahar, Email: moc.liamg@rahatedlihtam.
   ^corresponding author Corresponding author.
   Received 2021 Mar 5; Accepted 2022 Jan 12.
   Copyright © The Author(s) 2022
   Open AccessThis article is licensed under a Creative Commons
   Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
   adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
   long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
   source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
   changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
   article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless
   indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
   not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your
   intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the
   permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
   copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit
   http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

Abstract

   Biology seems to present local and transitory regularities rather than
   immutable laws. To account for these historically constituted
   regularities and to distinguish them from mathematical invariants,
   Montévil and Mossio (Journal of Theoretical Biology 372:179–191, 2015)
   have proposed to speak of constraints. In this article we analyse the
   causal power of these constraints in the evolution of biodiversity,
   i.e., their positivity, but also the modality of their action on the
   directions taken by evolution. We argue that to fully account for the
   causal power of these constraints on evolution, they must be thought of
   in terms of normativity. In this way, we want to highlight two
   characteristics of the evolutionary constraints. The first, already
   emphasised as reported by Gould (The structure of evolutionary theory,
   Harvard University Press, 2002), is that these constraints are both
   produced by and producing biological evolution and that this circular
   causation creates true novelties. The second is that this specific
   causality, which generates unpredictability in evolution, stems not
   only from the historicity of biological constraints, but also from
   their internalisation through the practices of living beings.
   Keywords: Theory of evolution, Biological constraints, Possibility
   space, Normativity, Biological agency, Historicity

Introduction

   The evolution of biological forms and functions does not seem fully
   explained by the laws that make physics intelligible (Longo et al.,
   2012). Evolution is less a mechanical sequence based on efficient
   causality than a process whose entities are in perpetual change (Dupré
   & Nicholson, 2018; Simons, 2018). It displays a continuity of forms,
   but also a progress: the lineages evolve in certain directions, without
   the space of the possible directions being predetermined. This does not
   mean that there is no stability nor regularity in the evolutionary
   process. On the contrary, evolution appears to be highly channelled. To
   account for biological regularities, Montévil and Mossio have proposed
   a theory of constraints (2015). This concept aims to explain how a
   certain entity can act, at a given moment, on processes. These entities
   are constraints for specific processes: they are local. They are also
   transient because historically constituted (Montévil, 2020). Through
   this concept, the authors manage to explain the relative stability of
   biological systems as a closure of constraints that channel biological
   processes. In this article, we will question the role of these
   constraints in evolution, beyond the scale of biological systems. Our
   aim is to account for their emergence from evolutionary history and to
   understand how they explain, and how they canalise the directions taken
   by evolution. We are therefore less interested in understanding how
   they stabilise biological systems than in identifying the causality of
   these constraints, which makes them a real driving force in evolution
   and generates biodiversity.

   The argument of this article is that biological constraints should be
   thought of as norms when trying to appreciate their causal role in the
   evolution of the biodiversity structure. It has been argued (Longo et
   al., 2012) that constraints in evolution are not necessitating their
   effects but enabling certain evolutionary directions. In this article,
   we wish to take up this idea by analysing more precisely the causal
   force of these constraints in terms of normativity, in order to give a
   concrete account of causation in evolution.

Trying to account for the regularities of evolution

   Evolution appears to be a relatively determined and channelled process.
   It displays a certain coherent stability: the evolution undergone by a
   species appears as linear and progressive; we observe similarities
   between organs performing the same function in different lineages. It
   also seems that not all transformations are possible; some morphologies
   may be inaccessible to some species: as Fodor (2007) says, pigs will
   probably never have wings. But although there is now a solid theory of
   evolution based on Darwinism and genetics, it remains difficult to
   comprehensively account for these regularities and to fully identify
   their sources.

Τelos in evolution?

   In order to explain evolutionary regularities, attempts have sometimes
   been made to use the Aristotelian concept of telos. Dennett for
   instance conceives of evolution as the progressive actualisation of the
   different possible phenotypes within a pregiven “Design Space”: “Design
   is Aristotle’s telos, an exploitation of Order for a purpose” (1995, p.
   64), the purpose of an organ adapted to a given ecological problem.
   What would explain the regularity of evolution would be the limited
   number of available solutions, i.e., of possible phenotypes. Beyond the
   shortcomings of such a teleological approach of evolution (Grene,
   1972), the main problem with this conception is that it implies a form
   of fixism or essentialism, which would consist in thinking that all the
   possible biological forms would be given a priori, from all eternity,
   evolution being just the history of their materialization. This leads
   us back to an idealistic vision, of the same type that Darwin already
   refuted, which made the species a form existing from all time. As
   Darwin showed, species is a naturalist’s abstraction, the species being
   merely more pronounced varieties, the evolution of a lineage consisting
   of the gradual transformation of an individual difference into a
   variety, then a species (Darwin, 2001, p. 54; pp. 60–61). There are no
   pre-ordained forms, prior to evolution.

The library of mendel

   Another way of grasping the regularities in evolution (complementary to
   the first) would be to assume that there would be rules preceding
   evolution, given by genetics. This idea is present in Dennett (1995)
   who speaks of a “Library of Mendel” as a genetic repertoire latently
   indicating the possible directions of evolution. It is true that genes
   structure evolution insofar as they carry the information allowing the
   formation of the organism, and a certain number of genes or groups of
   genes are found in different lineages—such is the case of the Hox gene
   which direct the development of the antero-posterior axis in
   vertebrates. But genetic sets change from one species to another, and
   from one organism to another, and more importantly the genetic
   processes themselves evolve over time. For instance, the presence of
   the Pax-6 gene (which is also a development gene but structurally
   distinct from the Hox gene) in several phyla (not only is it present in
   cephalopods and humans, but homologous genes are found in drosophila
   and fish) seems to reveal a strong necessity in the eye’s induction
   processes. But its functioning and expression are specific to each
   species: it controls the action of other genes which are specific to
   different species and whose effect is to result in eyes which are also
   specific. “[…T]he mechanism of eye induction may be conserved across
   the animal kingdom. However, [there is a] dramatic variation of eye
   structure not only between vertebrates and invertebrates, but also
   within the vertebrate lineage” (Neumann & Nüsslein-Volhard, 2000, pp.
   2138–2139). The way in which genes are expressed is not preordained and
   depends on the unique biological situation of the organism, which
   results from evolution itself.

Natural selection and the adaptation requirement

   To account for evolutionary regularities, some have proposed to
   conceive of natural selection as an algorithm that would sort through
   the genetic repertoire. According to Dawkins (1996, pp. 46–50), this
   algorithm should be thought of as follows. A text would be typed
   randomly and copied several times with a certain degree of random
   errors. The computer would choose, among the descending sentences of
   this first set of random letters, the one that would most resemble a
   “target phrase” determined in advance: the closer the phrases would be
   to the target, the more they would reproduce. The action of natural
   selection would be comparable to that of this algorithm which
   eliminates the texts furthest from the target; in evolution, the target
   would be adaptation. Even if it takes different forms depending on the
   situation, adaptation would be maintained as the general form of an
   imperative: that of survival and reproduction. Indeed, lineages persist
   by virtue of the interactions that organisms have with the environment,
   and these interactions are only maintained if they guarantee an
   adjustment of the species to the ecosystem in which they evolve.
   Therefore, adaptation could be considered as the consistent rule of
   evolution, explained by natural selection and that would account for
   the directions taken by the evolutionary process. However, this rule
   appears to be more of an imperative of efficiency (an individual who is
   not able to survive… does not survive), a minimal condition, than a
   real principle of explanation of the form taken by biodiversity and
   morphological evolution.

Failure of these proposals

   All these attempts to account for the regularities in evolution derive
   from a static, nomological view of evolution as resulting from
   immutable laws. This is why they try to account for the observed
   stabilities in a monolithic way, even if it means falling into a
   deflationary explanation that only gives a negative account of the
   directions taken by evolution. Jointly, the entities under
   consideration (organisms, species) are seen as ontologically preceding
   evolution. This is a substantialist view of evolution, outdated since
   Darwin. Evolution is the process by which species are generated and
   evolve (let us note that it is species or populations that evolve, not
   individuals); from this point of view, both species and organisms are
   secondary to evolution. They take their forms from this process, and,
   above all, they are transient in respect of the process itself.
   Biological evolution is indeed a process in the strong sense given by
   Dupré and Nicholson (2018, pp. 11–14): it is extended in time, and this
   flow of time means change. Change is thus ontologically primary with
   respect to the entities that it produces. Thus, in biology, “entities”
   appear as “transient patterns of stability” (Ibid., p. 13): organisms
   are constantly changing, species evolve, diverge, become extinct, new
   species arise… They are not fixed entities, but processes that are
   relatively stable (Miquel & Hwang, 2016), or, as Peter Simons puts it
   “precipitates of processes” (Simons, 2018, p. 55). What is fundamental
   in evolution is not the entities, which are always transitory, but the
   dynamic processes that give rise to their relative stability (Soto et
   al., 2016a, 2016b).

   Thus, in order to explain the regularities in evolution, it is
   necessary to move away from a nomological and monolithic approach and
   to take into consideration their historicity.

Evolutionary constraints and history

Historical constraints

   Following Gould and Lewontin (1979), we do not deny either the
   necessity of adaptation nor the constraint of the genetic heritage but
   wish to demonstrate that these conditions alone are not enough to
   explain the diversity of forms or the dynamics of the process.
   Evolution towards adaptation is subject to multiple other conditions,
   which, as Gould shows (2002, pp. 1027–1037), appear as constraints for
   a pan-adaptive explanation; since they are non-classical factors that
   act differently from what orthodoxy predicts. But they are also real
   constraints since they canalise change, whether they are structures
   inherited from the past or physical determinisms. These constraints
   should not be understood in the sense of mere obstacles, but also in
   their positivity. Gould posits two characteristics of constraint (2002,
   p. 1026):
    1. “Coherent set of causal factors that can promote evolutionary
       change”.^1
    2. “The concept of constraint must include theoretically legitimate
       and factually important positive meanings—i.e., constraints as
       directing causes of particular evolutionary changes—rather than
       only the negative connotations of structural limitations that
       prevent natural selection from crafting an alteration that would
       otherwise be favored and achieved”.

   Gould distinguishes three types of constraint, all of which are linked
   to the history of organisms and thus also of evolution. The first is
   the functional constraint, which comes from natural selection, i.e.,
   the necessity of adaptation, the terms of which are set by the current
   conditions of the environment. It must be stressed that even this
   constraint has a historical dimension insofar as the environment
   sorting out the fitted variations is also shaped by the way organisms
   have lived in and thus transformed this environment. In addition to
   this first “orthodox” constraint, there is the structural one, which
   can come from the direct action of physical laws on the plastic matter
   (an ahistorical phenomenon)—for instance, the fact that flying fish
   fall back into the water because of their mass, is not only a physical
   necessity but a biological aptation (i.e., it is aptive, even though it
   is not an adaptation built by natural selection) (2002, p. 1054). But
   it can also be the constraint of the architectural laws determining the
   appearance of traits as non-adaptive corollaries of other structures,
   which can then be co-opted. Gould gives as an example the correlation
   between the presence of a second row of teeth and the abnormal
   hairiness of Julia Pastrana (Ibid., p. 1055). This correlation is
   determined by homological constraints between hairiness and dentition
   that originate in the phyletic singularity of mammalian development.
   These constraints are born of the evolutionary history of organisms,
   but they can also guide future evolution by canalizing evolutionary
   change. This is the case of the fontanelles, constraints specific to
   vertebrates, due to the development of the skeleton, and which
   subsequently became functional in mammals insofar as they allow the
   skull to deform during the compression of parturition (Darwin, 2001, p.
   180). Finally, there are the genealogical constraints: traits inherited
   from ancestral forms, whether or not it has been shaped by natural
   selection, which constrain and positively orient both the possibilities
   of immediate change and the settlement of the morpho-space.

   To account for the positive dimension of these constraints, Gould
   thinks of their role in the formation of aptive traits. He proposes an
   “aptive triangle” based on the model of the triangle used in petrology
   (Fig. 1). Each of the vertices corresponds to one of the three
   constraints, understood as an influence canalizing evolution. To
   explain the appearance of a trait, all the three vertices should be
   considered (the trait will correspond to a point located inside the
   triangle according to the respective influence of these three idealised
   vertices). However, if the condition of evolution is the adaptation of
   organisms, an adaptation subject to internal constraints, what seems
   fundamental to understanding the respective role of these constraints
   in the appearance of a trait and thus, more broadly, the directions
   taken by evolution, is history. For it is history that explains the
   inhomogeneous distributions of organisms across the potential
   morpho-space of good organic design. The occupation of morpho-space is
   not explained by natural selection alone: it does not represent the
   figure of the best possible solutions to functional problems, but
   depends on a bundle of constraints, which are all ultimately explained
   by history (Gould, 2002, pp. 1055–1056).
   An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name
   is 40656_2022_483_Fig1_HTML.jpg
   Open in a separate window
   Fig. 1

   Aptive triangle redesigned from Gould, (2002, p. 1052). The three
   vertices correspond to the different influences on the formation of a
   trait (the trait will correspond to a point located inside the triangle
   according to the respective influence of these three vertices).
   “Standard triangular diagrams for depicting basic causes of form as
   functional (immediate adaptation to current circumstances), historical
   (inherited by homology, whatever the basis of ancestral origin), and
   structural, or arising either as physical consequence of other features
   or directly from the nature of physical forces acting on biological
   materials. All vertices may yield aptive traits of great utility to the
   organism” (Gould, 2002, p. 1052)

The ever-changing space of possibilities

   This conception makes it possible to account for the plurality of
   evolutionary constraints, as well as for their historicity.
   Nevertheless, their action is not only negative: they channel the
   future by opening its possibilities. If constraints were completely
   stable, the evolutionary process would only be entropic, and thus
   predictable: as time progresses, organisms would occupy more and more
   possible places in morpho-space; a decrease in organisation and an
   increase in disorder would be achieved. Yet, what is observed is “a
   decisively non-random, occupation of a theoretical ‘design space’”
   (Gould, 2002, p. 1055), and even an increasing organisation in the
   genealogies and in the organisms (based on the observation that living
   forms become more diverse and complex, Bailly & Longo, 2009; McShea &
   Brandon, 2010) which is opposed to the idea of entropy itself. This
   problem is taken up by Brooks and Wiley (1988). According to them,
   evolution is an entropic phenomenon (because of the variability of
   organisms, the further time goes by, the more possible genotypes, i.e.,
   possible microstates, are occupied by organisms), even though a growing
   organisation in biodiversity is observed, i.e., an increasing distance
   from randomness, both within organisms and in the structuring of
   niches. To understand this, the historical dimension of evolution and
   its constraints must be considered.

   In biology, unlike in physics, history has a special efficacy in that
   it is not the exploration of a pregiven space of possibilities (or
   phase space): the phase space is constantly changing in ways that
   cannot be predicted. Brooks and Wiley conceive this change in terms of
   growth: the more time goes by, the more microstates there would be.
   Organisation would emerge from a difference in rhythm: the increase in
   the phase space would be faster than the realised increase in entropy
   (Fig. 2). Longo, Montévil and Kauffman show that in reality the change
   in phase space is not quantitative. Since the relevant observables in
   biology are not invariants (they are instead characterised by their
   variability, Longo et al. ) and since the constraints that structure
   the phase space are themselves historical (Montévil, 2020), it is the
   very structure of the phase space that changes over time, albeit with a
   coordinated increase in entropy and organisation. This last point stems
   from the fact that the phase space itself is historically constituted.
   It transforms while retaining something of its past structure: the
   ontogenetic constraints, born of evolution, canalise the successful
   realisation of genotypes, even if the genotypes not realised may be
   accessible microstates; certain genotypic combinations are also made
   impossible by the fact that speciation has distributed genetic
   information across different lineages over time (lineages that do not
   reproduce each other).
   An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name
   is 40656_2022_483_Fig2_HTML.jpg
   Open in a separate window
   Fig. 2

   The entropy in evolution, redesigned from Brooks & Wiley, (1988, p.
   40). The difference between H[max] (increasing entropy maximum) and
   H[obs] (the observed entropy) is organization, while the value of Hobs
   is a measure of the entropy of the system. If this scheme is applied to
   evolutionary lineages (1988, p. 43), H[obs] measures the historically
   realized diversity. The historical exclusion of the expression of
   certain kinds of information is measured by the difference between
   H[max] and H[obs]. The aera above H[max] corresponds to impossible
   combinations because no novelties exist (at the time observed). But
   what is impossible at one moment may become possible at a later time
   period. It can also be applied to represent the gap between the number
   of possible genotypes H[max] and the distribution of observed genotypes
   H[obs] (1988, pp. 44–45)

   Therefore, it is the historical dimension of constraints that gives
   them their positive dynamic. Constraints in evolution emerge from the
   evolutionary process and orient it by redefining the space of
   possibilities. Not only do they canalise change as they prevent
   biological systems from occupying all possible genetic configurations,
   but they themselves evolve in such a way that the space of
   morphological phases is constantly changing: they create new
   possibilities, which will become new constraints (Montévil, 2019). It
   is this creative dimension that must now be investigated.

Biological interactions and evolutionary norms

   To understand how these constraints can emerge from evolution while
   canalising it, it is necessary to grasp the very process of evolution
   in its concreteness. Dupré and Nicholson define it, in the same way as
   rain, light or fermentation, as an unowned process (2018, p. 12),
   because the entities of this process are not its substrates but its
   precipitates. Yet, in evolution, the precipitates are at the same time
   the transitory agents of this process, for evolution is the history of
   the interactions of living beings. As Fisher writes, the motor of
   evolutionary change is “in the actual life of living things; in their
   contacts and conflicts with their environments, with the outer world as
   it is to them; in their unconscious efforts to grow, or their more
   conscious efforts to move. Especially, in the vital drama of the
   success or failure of each of their enterprises” (1950, p. 184). Thus,
   it could be said that since evolution belongs to no one in particular,
   it belongs to everyone: it is a process knotted by interactions whose
   agents are in in(de)finite number, that is to say knotted by an
   indefinite number of processes (the agents being, as we have seen,
   stabilised processes).

Constraints and interactions

   Indeed, if the horizon of evolution is the adaptation of organisms to
   their environment, this constraint is dynamic: it comes from a history
   and shapes this history. It is not a constraint imposed unilaterally
   and externally by the environment but is constituted by the history of
   the interactions of organisms with their environment, as they also
   transform this environment. The causality is not unilinear. It cannot
   be said that the niche causes the means of survival of the living being
   and its evolution, since the niche is what allows the living being to
   survive (by definition, otherwise it would not evolve in this precise
   environment). The phenotype of a living being, and its niche are
   defined by each other; hence, no causal priority can be given to one or
   the other (Fodor & Piattelli-Palmarini, 2011). Niches are not waiting
   to be filled until the day when miraculously the right phenotype
   appears. The evolution of the forms of living beings cannot be
   understood as responses to the constraints set by the environment,
   since environment and its stakes are defined on the basis of phenotypic
   traits that are supposed to be adaptations: “But that there are
   spiders, who would have guessed how to spin webs to catch flies is an
   ecological problem?” (Ibid., p. 140). Fodor and Piattelli-Palmarini
   denounce an inverted reasoning of the type: locks exist for keys to
   open them, rather than keys are made to open locks. They answer the
   question of this chapter “Did the dodo lose its ecological niche? Or
   was it the other way around?”: “The extinction of the dodo was the very
   same event as the extinction of the dodo’s way of making a living so
   neither can serve to explain the other” (Ibid., p. 147). The constraint
   emerges from the horizon represented by the niche: it is neither given
   by the environment unilaterally nor by organisms.

   It is the history of the co-construction of the niche that supplies the
   conditions for the survival of organisms and species, thereby
   channelling the evolutionary process in certain directions that will
   produce the new constraints of the niche. Thus, these constraints are
   the products of interactions, i.e., concrete, practical relations,
   which involve agents: the living beings in relation with each other and
   with their environment. Living beings are not (necessarily) cognitive
   agents, but they are agents insofar as they actively take part, through
   their interactions, in evolutionary history. “An updated account of
   evolution […] should, at least, represent adaptive evolution […] as the
   interaction of agents and their affordances. It should take seriously
   the Darwinian insight that evolution is the direct consequence of what
   organisms do” (Walsh, 2015, p. 241). Hence, constraints in evolution
   should rather be thought of as norms.

Normative interactions

   This does not mean that it is the agents who directly behave
   normatively, but that their interactions have a normative part. To
   capture this, Brooks and Wiley use the image of a playground (1988, p.
   83). Organisms impose constraints which come from their genealogy and
   define the conditions of their self-organisation. There is also an
   “ecological hierarchy” which refers to the relationship between
   organisms and their environment and which defines another type of
   constraint: boundary conditions. The latter give the playing field,
   where the constraints of the organisms produce the rules of the game.
   Several games can be played on the same field, but only one at a time.
   Biological systems therefore obey organisational rules, and their
   playground is the boundaries defined by the planet. Evolution is the
   meeting of changes in the rules of the game and of correlative changes
   in the dimensions of the playing field, inasmuch as these changes are
   reflected in the biological interactions of organisms.

   So far, we have discussed the interaction of organisms with their
   environment, but evolution depends on multiple interactions that go far
   beyond this bilateral relationship. As Darwin himself pointed out, it
   relies on the intensity of the struggle for existence, which is not
   only a struggle with the environment, but a struggle between individual
   agents for access to resources that can take very various forms.
   Although we cannot exhaustively illustrate the complexity of the
   interactive processes at work in evolution (which range from
   competition between cells in development to the differentiated
   extinction of species in catastrophic upheavals), we will nevertheless
   give an example: that of competition between species.

Interactions of wolbachia

   One aspect of this competition is the relationship between the parasite
   and its host. This relationship has a normative dimension in that it
   channels the evolution of the two species involved, but this
   channelling is highly dependent on the way the biological agents
   interact in their unique biological situation. The interaction of the
   bacterium Wolbachia with different insects is a remarkable example. In
   the hymenopter Asobara tabida, Wolbachia is indispensable for the
   ovogenesis of its host (Dedeine et al., 2001). But in most other
   insects, Wolbachia is a reproduction parasite. In Hypolimnas bolina, it
   kills males in the embryonic stage, conserving only females (Dyson &
   Hurst, 2004). In the woodlouse Armadillidium vulgare, Wolbachia doesn’t
   kill males but induces the development of woodlouse embryos into
   females, irrespective of the sex chromosomes carried by the embryos
   (Cordaux et al., 2011). In Armadillidium vulgare, there is chromosomal
   sex determination based on female ZW/ZZ heterogamety. But when
   genetically male embryos carry Wolbachia, they develop into functional
   females. Wolbachia thus clearly increases its reproduction since
   instead of being in a male which will not transmit it to any of its
   descendants, it is in a female which will transmit it to almost all its
   descendants. In addition, Wolbachia can pass on its f genetical factor
   which feminises males (once f is passed on, there is no need for
   Wolbachia to be present for feminisation). Some populations of ZZ
   females can even be found without the presence of the Wolbachia
   bacterium (Leclercq, et al., 2016). However, the nuclear genes carried
   by the majority sex in the population are disadvantaged. The risk is
   that there will be no more male, and therefore no further reproduction
   of the woodlouse. As a result, genetic resistances to feminisation have
   been observed in natural populations of Armadillidium vulgare: mainly
   the M gene which is able to restore the male phenotype in the presence
   of f (Rigaud & Juchault, 1993); but also, a polygenic system that has
   no direct impact on the phenotype but limits the rate of transmission
   of Wolbachia to the offspring (Rigaud & Juchault, 1992). Another form
   of resistance, also present in Hypolimnas bolina (Charlat et al.,
   2007), is the development of a strong copulatory capacity in woodlouse
   males (Moreau & Rigaud, 2003). Interactions with Wolbachia have very
   different evolutionary consequences from one species to another, but
   also within populations of the same species. It should also be
   underlined that the resistances are passed on from one generation to
   the next. The interaction has therefore created new constraints in the
   long term, through genetic changes. The constraint of adaptation here
   translates into the fact that the woodlouse must evolve to survive (it
   is a good example of the Red Queen hypothesis, Van Valen, 1973). The
   genetic constraint is also involved: evolution depends on the genetic
   variability available. But what really allows these constraints to
   orient evolution and transform the process from which they emerge, is
   the normativity of the interaction itself, as it takes different forms
   from one species to another, and from one population to another.

   This normativity of interactions is crucial in medical biology to
   understand diseases (see Méthot & Alizon, 2015). The virulence of a
   microbe, for instance, depends on the specific interaction between the
   pathogen and its host: a microbe is not intrinsically pathogenic, it is
   the relationship with its host that will define whether it is
   pathogenic. In addition, some microbes, initially non-pathogenic on a
   particular host, may subsequently evolve and become pathogenic to that
   host. This property of pathogenic or not, which seems to be a normative
   property par excellence ‘good’ or ‘bad’, depends on the host, the
   microbe, and their interaction. It is by understanding this normative
   relationship that we can grasp the direction taken by evolution. If the
   parasite is not pathogenic, then there can be co-evolution with its
   host; if it is weakly pathogenic, there can be an ‘arms race’; if it is
   highly pathogenic, this can lead to the extinction of the host species.

   These interactions also define their own evolutionary norms in relation
   to their environment. Let’s consider two species of birds from
   different lineages. The first, due to its evolutionary history, can
   only feed on berries while the second can feed on both berries and
   seeds. Suppose that the environment contains berries and seeds in equal
   proportion: it can be assumed that the species that feeds on both
   berries and seeds will feed on the seeds, so as not to compete with the
   other species. Here there are evolutionary processes coming from
   speciation that meet and structure the ecological space. In return,
   this patterning has a retroactive effect on the evolution of these two
   species: the second species may come to lose its ability to ingest
   berries. It is in the reciprocal influence of constrained processes
   that evolutionary normativity emerges.

   Thus, the role of biological constraints in the directions taken by
   evolution depends on the diversity of organisms and their particular
   ecological situation. It is these various concrete interactions that
   explain the creativity of constraints, and which make it necessary to
   speak, in the case of evolution, of evolutionary norms.

Evolutionary norms

   The word norm is used in specific cases in biology: the normal versus
   the pathological in medical biology (a polarity famously conceptualised
   by Canguilhem, 1966), or in the established expression “norms of
   reaction” dealing with phenotypic plasticity (West-Eberhard, 2003;
   Woltereck, 1909). We speak of norm in a broader sense, since it is the
   very causality at work in evolution that we propose to think of as
   normative. In order to draw up an operational definition of the concept
   for evolutionary biology, let us review its different meanings. Apart
   from the strictly mathematical sense, we identify three main meanings,
   based on the definitions listed by Merriam-Webster Dictionary and ATILF
   Lorraine (which relates to the French word, but is more detailed):
    1. A regular state in relation to an average.
    2. A state of conformity in relation to an average, which then takes
       on the value of an “ideal type”.
    3. A standard to which one refers to judge, but also to act. Thus, in
       human productions, the norm takes on the meaning of a “rule, law in
       an artistic, scientific or technical field; conditions that must be
       respected in an accomplishment; prescription that must be followed
       in the study of a science, the practice of an activity, an art”
       (ATILF—CNRS & Université de Lorraine, our translation). It is not a
       rule only for judgment, but for practice. Another important
       characteristic is that it depends on the socio-cultural context,
       which is itself changing; it emerges from practices. This
       definition emphasises the dynamic dimension of the norm: it gives
       directions to a practice, and it emerges from a particular context
       which comes from the very history of this practice: it is therefore
       historical or evolutionary. The norm has both a creative positivity
       (its power does not only consist in a limitation but also in the
       fact that it constitutes opportunities) and emerges from and
       structures the interactions and practices of agents who live these
       norms.

   (a) and (b) are static definitions, and therefore are not adequate for
   thinking of evolution. It is from (c) that we think we should speak of
   norms in the evolutionary process although leaving aside the cultural
   framework. These norms are:
    1. Transitory rules which are,
    2. Both produced by and producing a historical process, and
    3. Have a creative dimension (they do not only limit or constrain the
       process, but transform the space of possibilities)
    4. Deriving from the fact that they are internalised in interactions,
       i.e., practices giving them their power and normative meaning.

   Grasping this normativity of biological constraints in evolution also
   allows us to understand their causal modality, beyond traditional logic
   and a substantialist conception of evolution. It is not just a matter
   of replacing one word with another: constraints in evolution do have a
   normative power.

The normative power of evolutionary constraints

Their positive value

   Biological constraints are not necessitating causes (Longo et al.,
   2012): they do not cause a predetermined effect. Nor can they be said
   to actualise possibilities, since as we have seen, the possible is not
   predefined in biology. They form opportunities for evolution itself
   (see also Jacob, 1977 or Caporael et al., 2014), opportunities that
   were not predicted, and which generate real novelties.

   This is why Montévil speaks of constraints as possible innovations:
   “the constraint plays a role, and this role is performed in a specific
   manner by generating other constraints” (Montévil, 2019, p. 4574). He
   takes the following example: “articulated jaws enabled teeth such as
   molars which can crush food. However, crushing food with the mouth was
   and still is not an actual possibility at all for Chordates without
   articulated jaws” (Ibid., p. 4575). The evolutionary novelty of
   articulated jaws is part of the organisation of an organism in such a
   way that it becomes a structural constraint, but also widens the space
   of possibilities in the organism by offering the opportunity for a new
   function: crushing food. The emergence of the first novelty
   (articulated jaws) is a necessary ingredient for the second novelty
   (teeth) to be able to play a functional role (crushing food). Thus, new
   traits allow secondary novelties that could not have been foreseen
   before the appearance of these new traits. And it is by this very fact
   that innovations acquire their constraining aspect in the sense of a
   stabiliser: “a novelty may become deeply integrated into certain
   biological organizations, making its complete disappearance unlikely to
   be viable” (Ibid., p. 4576). Both a channelling force and a breeding
   ground for innovation, evolutionary constraints have both aspects (1)
   and (2) of norms. We may add from the example we have just studied that
   it also has a creative dimension (3).

The creative circularity of constraints

   But to better appreciate (3), let us consider a more paradigmatic
   example found in Gould, which highlights the creativity of constraints
   by revealing the diversity of meanings they can take on in the course
   of history. This example follows on from an excerpt of The Genealogy of
   Morals by Nietzsche on historical research, that Gould (2002, p. 1216)
   uses to think of evolution: “‘Namely, that the origin or the emergence
   of a thing and its ultimate usefulness, its practical application and
   incorporation into a system of ends, are toto coelo [entirely, or
   literally ‘to the highest heavens’] separate; that anything in
   existence, having somehow come about, is continually interpreted anew,
   requisitioned anew, transformed and directed to a new purpose’”. Rather
   than simply referring to cases of exaptation (a change in function of a
   structure in the course of evolution), Gould gives an example of what
   could be called an “overloading” (Longo, 2018, pp. 457–458) which
   further reveals the abundant and unpredictable creativity of
   evolutionary constraints. While Gould does not embrace the full
   Nietzschean analysis, he “do[es] appreciate Nietzsche’s point, which
   can be translated into evolutionary terms as the source of constraint”
   (Gould, 2002, p. 1218). He adds: “The original reason does continue to
   exert a hold upon history through the structural constraints that
   channel later usages. Once feathers originate for thermoregulation, the
   form of any later utility for flight will be influenced by features
   built for the original context” (Ibid.). This diversion through
   Nietzsche underlines the fact that the historical constraints that have
   come to crystallise in evolution also constitute reserves of
   potentialities. Gould refers to the remarkable case of overloading
   found in the black heron Egretta Ardesiaca, which uses its wings to
   shade the shallow water of its habitat, “thus providing a clear view of
   available prey” (Ibid., p. 1225). It is implausible that the wings
   originally evolved for the sole purpose of shading so that the herons
   could better see their prey. On the other hand, it is probable that
   wings evolved in the context of the advantage that flight presented for
   these animals, and that subsequently this structural adaptation may
   have taken on another possible meaning: that of shading to find prey.
   But Gould goes even further back: in fact, it is likely that “feathers
   were initially coopted for flight in a much older functional shift, a
   defining transition in avian phylogeny from a different initial role,
   perhaps in thermoregulation” (he refers to Kingsolver & Koehl, 1985;
   Gould, 2002, p. 1226). This example enriches the aptive triangle by an
   excess at the level of the functional vertex, which would come from the
   creative circularity of the different constraint vertices (Fig. 3). The
   causality is thus less rectilinear than circular. And there would be a
   sort of indefinite accumulation at the functional level, an
   accumulation which is no longer so much structural (even if it is
   accompanied by phenotypic changes) as semantic.
   An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name
   is 40656_2022_483_Fig3_HTML.jpg
   Open in a separate window
   Fig. 3

   Reinterpretation of the aptive triangle from Gould, 2002, p. 1059. The
   arrows An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object
   name is 40656_2022_483_Figa_HTML.gif reflect the functionalist
   interpretation of the theory of evolution, which sees history and
   structure as constraints imposed on the functional vertex. The arrows
   An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name
   is 40656_2022_483_Figb_HTML.gif are added to highlight the causal
   circularity of constraints on each other. The arrows An external file
   that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name is
   40656_2022_483_Figc_HTML.gif indicate the various meanings that these
   constraints can take on for the organism. They usually appear
   successively. They may be contemporary with each other (functional
   overload), or on the contrary be mutually exclusive (exaptation). These
   different meanings are not predictable because they arise from the
   causal circularity of the constraints which are themselves transitory

A continual reinterpretation

   There is a causal circularity coming from the perpetual
   reinterpretation of the constraints by the organisms which make them
   true evolutionary norms. From this perspective, it should be underlined
   that some constraints did not emerge from the functional vertex: there
   are some actual aptive features which were originally non-aptations.
   Their evolutionary meaning changed in the course of history. This is
   the case of the fontanelles we mentioned. This also the case of the
   repetitive DNA that Gould and Vrba describe as “nonapted features,
   available for cooptation later, but not serving any direct function at
   the moment. When coopted, they will be exaptations in their new role
   (with secondary adaptive modification if altered)” (1982, p. 11).
   Another example provided by Gould (2002, pp. 1282–1284) which will
   enable us to apprehend the evolutionary dynamics of these constraints,
   this time on an ecological scale, is that of Linepithema humile. In
   Argentina, these ants split into colonies of genetically closer
   individuals, colonies that compete with each other, with the result
   that the entire species remains at relatively low population density
   levels. This is not the case in California. The population of ancestors
   of the ants that invaded California presented a genetic bottleneck (the
   population probably came from a single indigenous colony in Argentina).
   Being all very close genetically, they formed a single large colony of
   ants which quickly invaded California, their population not being
   regulated by inter-colonial conflicts. Their ecological success in
   California paradoxically stems from the disappearance of an adaptation
   (colony recognition) induced by the loss of genetic diversity. Hence,
   the constraint represented by the loss of diversity proved adaptive in
   this particular context and transformed the Californian biotope. It
   should be added that this feature could also prove to be “pathological”
   in the event of sudden environmental changes, since the lack of
   competition could again lead to a genetic drift that would either lead
   to a situation like that in Argentina, or to extinction.

   These examples show the creativity of constraints (3) through their
   perpetual reinterpretation. They reveal the way in which these
   reinterpretations emerge from evolution itself, as a historical process
   (2), while at the same time channelling that same process (1). But it
   is (4) that is crucial to understanding the modality of their causal
   power. Gould often refers to constraints as forming “reservoirs of
   potential” (2002, p. 49) and as generating evolvability (Ibid., pp.
   1270–1295). He writes about the genetic development pathways: “the
   constraints of these rules have provided more flexibility in their
   fecund channels than limitations through their 'forbidden places'”
   (Ibid., p. 1272). But how do these constraints orient evolution towards
   non-determined possibilities? How do they induce evolutionary change?
   By what causality do they channel evolution? There are two
   indissociable questions here: what is the exact modality of their
   causal power? And where do they get this causal power from? This is
   where we think it is crucial to understand evolutionary constraints as
   norms: these two questions are resolved if the power of these
   constraints is understood as normative.

Trying to think modality beyond Aristotelian categories

   In Aristotle (2017, pp. 12, 21a35—13, 23b27), there are four
   fundamental modalities. The possible (that which does not imply
   contradiction and can therefore be true) is the contradiction of the
   impossible (that which implies contradiction, i.e., that which cannot
   be true); the necessary (that which cannot be otherwise than it is and
   therefore cannot not be true) is the contradiction of the contingent
   (that which could have been different from what it is; its contrary was
   also possible, i.e., it can be false). These four modalities imply a
   pre-determined space of possibilities, and hence appear insufficient
   for thinking of the causal force of evolutionary constraints, and of
   their potential. Most physical laws entail a necessity: they indicate
   that, in a given situation, if the conditions are met, the effect will
   occur. But biological constraints do not necessitate as physical laws
   do. Their historicity and the multiplicity of singular processes that
   characterise the situations in which they are actualised make them
   shifting norms that do not display a predictive uniformity. And yet, if
   they widen the possibilities of evolution, they allow the organisation
   of biological phenomena, in so far as evolution is not a process that
   would tend more and more towards randomness. This is why their
   normative power cannot be considered as part of the category of
   possibility either. They orient evolution in such a way that it does
   not realise just any possibility, but some possibilities rather than
   others: the most functional and relevant ones, the possibilities
   leading to an increasingly organised evolution.

   Mumford and Anjum seek a third modal path between necessity (and its
   contradictory: contingency) and possibility (and its contradictory:
   impossibility), because these categories do not allow for an account of
   the canalising power of processes (2018a, pp. 31–35) which they speak
   of in terms of tendency. Processes tend in certain directions, without
   these directions being necessitated, nor having the status of mere
   possibilities. The modal status of the tendency would be irreducible to
   the traditional modalities and would lie somewhere between pure
   necessity and pure contingency (Mumford & Anjum, 2011, p. viii). They
   call this modality dispositional and ground it on a metaphysical
   conception of reality that conceives of all causality in terms of
   process (Ibid., p. ix).^2 In Getting causes from powers, the
   dispositional modality is described as follows: given a cause A, the
   effect B is not just one possibility among others; A tends to manifest
   B if nothing prevents it. However, this formulation fails to really
   break out of the traditional logic because it could be connected to a
   sense of contingency already present in Aristotle: ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ πολύ (what
   most often occurs, 2009, I 3, 25b14 and I 13, 32b7) and which is
   statistic. Mumford and Anjum write that the dispositions are “disposed
   to happen in a non-negligible probability” (2011, p. 181). Moreover, it
   seems that dispositional modality is not irreducible to necessity,
   since it could be described in terms of conditional necessity (the
   expected effect occurs if other causes do not interfere). According to
   Sinclair (2019), in order to account for this sui generis modality, one
   would have to go beyond external manifestation and say something about
   the internal force, insofar as it may not come to manifestation. This
   is what Mumford and Anjum propose in What tends to be when they argue
   that a tendency is an internal force that may produce an effect without
   requiring it but may also not come to its manifestation even though
   there is nothing to prevent it (2018a, pp. 17–18). The force or power
   in its manifestation is intrinsically a function of tendency rather
   than necessity. It is the power of a causal process constituted by its
   temporal thickness: it takes time to unfold, a time during which “some
   properties will be lost, and new properties and new interactions might
   be introduced” (Ibid., p. 80). Sinclair (2019) tends to account for
   this last point by calling on the internal experience of inclination
   that would allow us to think concretely of dispositional modality by
   revealing the efficacy of the very duration of the process. It is also
   this processual dimension that Mumford and Anjum emphasise to conceive
   causality in biology, a realm characterised by perpetual change and
   activity (2018b). They give the example of pregnancy: it can be thought
   that it goes from cause (the sexual act) to effect (the birth of a
   child). However, pregnancy is not a linear process going from
   reproduction to birth; many other processes are at stake which interact
   with and even contribute to this primary process: bodily,
   physiological, hormonal changes…

Normative modality and biological practices

   But this approach seems insufficient for biological evolution, in two
   respects. On the one hand, it does not account for the reconfiguration
   of the space of possibilities specific to biological evolution. The
   authors conceive the dispositional modality as applying to any
   phenomenon. They underline that there are degrees of possibilities,
   which seem to be linked to probability. Yet, probability is a measure
   on a given space of possibilities. Thus, they do not address the truly
   innovative nature of the possibilities created during evolution. The
   authors investigate the causal link between A and its typical
   manifestation B. But in evolution, B is not predetermined, and is
   therefore not predictable no matter how much information is available
   about A. It is no coincidence that the biological example given by
   Mumford and Anjum is not borrowed from evolutionary biology. In
   evolution there are no typical manifestations, only special cases. As
   Longo puts it «biological events are rare […] in view of their
   biological specificity or historicity: each event is individually rare,
   even if this type of events happens continually in evolution and
   contribute to the construction of all phylogenetic paths” (2018, p.
   469). On the other hand, the authors underline the close link between
   the manifestation of the effect and the continuity of the process that
   causes it, but do not account for the fact that, in evolution, the
   causality displays a creative circularity: the evolutionary norms, are
   both produced by and producers of the evolutionary process. They
   indicate that what accounts for dispositionality in biology is the fact
   that life is made up of activities, but do not directly link these
   activities with their conception of causality.

   We believe, on the contrary, that these activities must be at the
   centre of a conception of causality in evolution, since it is they that
   account for the creativity of evolutionary constraints as well as their
   specific causality. It is because constraints arise from interactions
   that are woven by agents, and because, from this point of view, they
   constitute real biological norms, that they have the power to canalise
   evolution. To understand the causality of constraints in evolution, it
   is therefore necessary to take into consideration the agency of living
   beings. For it is living beings that internalise and manifest them
   through practices, i.e., activities that are embedded in and transform
   their living conditions and thus the rest of evolution. This is why, to
   envision this driving role of organisms in evolution, Walsh proposes an
   agent theory. For ecological constraints, for example, to have a truly
   positive action, they must form opportunities for organisms. Hence, the
   latter must be true agents, i.e., beings capable of experiencing these
   conditions as affordances and of responding to them through practices
   likely to transform these very conditions (Walsh, 2015, p. 163). The
   living themselves actively constitute the constraints to which they are
   subject, through their agency (Ibid., p. 173). Thus, the power of the
   evolutionary constraints comes from their normative part, from the way
   in which living beings internalise them in activities that create new
   constraints that can transform evolutionary history. If we look back at
   the example of the functional overloading of the black heron’s wings,
   the morphological constraint (the feathers) resulting from the
   adaptation of thermoregulation constituted a crucial opportunity since
   it enabled the heron to fly. The practice of flight by the heron led to
   a selection such that the proto-wings became real wings: this practice
   was actualised in a morphological constraint, underpinned by genetic
   processes. And in return, this constraint allowed the emergence of a
   further new practice (and therefore also a new function) through the
   use of the parasol wing. The creative circularity of evolutionary
   constraints becomes illuminating when they are understood as norms
   whose multiple meanings arise from the concrete practices of organisms
   conceived as biological agents. Similarly for the diverse interactions
   of Wolbachia: it is within each interaction, in the way it is
   concretely tied up by the agents involved, that evolvability is played
   out. Neither the historical, morphological and ecological data nor the
   imperative of adaptation determine the directions taken by evolution.
   Instead, these constraints act as norms that living beings internalise
   into biological activities canalising future evolution. Let us
   emphasise that internalisation here is not psychological nor
   subjective: living beings are not necessarily cognitive agents, but
   they are agents insofar as they experience these biological norms in
   the particularity of their situation and transform them by their
   likewise particular practice. The changes in meaning of the black
   heron’s wing, or of the interaction of host and parasite, do not
   require a passage through conscious subjectivity, but only a passage
   through the activity of the living as historical interactions that
   constantly transform the constraints they inherit into new
   possibilities.

   This leads us to the first point that the dispositional modality failed
   to account for: the change in the space of possibilities, and thus the
   unpredictability of evolution. The various consequences of the presence
   of Wolbachia on the evolution of its host reveal the importance of the
   internalisation of norms in interactions which are always particular
   cases. The biological norm is always local and transitory, i.e.,
   specific to a time and place in evolutionary history. And it is within
   these “rare” conditions—in the sense given by Longo (2018): specific,
   historical—that living beings experience these norms through practices
   that are also rare. Therefore, it is because evolutionary constraints
   constitute norms for living beings that they can be truly innovative:
   they owe their power to the way organisms internalise them. They arise
   from the evolutionary process as it is shaped by the activities and
   practices of living beings, but they also channel this process, and
   even generate its future possibilities, through internalisation, i.e.,
   the way in which living beings experience these norms and actualise
   them through practices in the specificity of their unique situation. It
   is precisely because these norms are internalised in the practices of
   particular agents in specific situations that evolution is truly
   unpredictable (the phase space is perpetually changing).

   The outcome B is not predictable from the norm A, because the very
   possibility of B emerges from the way particular agents internalise A
   through an equally particular or rare practice C. It is from this
   internalisation that biological constraints derive their power: they
   become norms for evolution.

Conclusion

   Our aim was to clarify the causal power of biological constraints on
   the evolution of biodiversity. We argued that this power became
   illuminating if thought of in terms of normativity. We began with a
   critical moment aimed at identifying the inadequacies of the
   explanations traditionally proposed to account for regularities in
   biology. Moving away from these nomological, often monolithic, and in
   any case static conceptions of evolution, we proposed an analysis of
   the multiple constraints that canalise the forms taken by biodiversity.
   We highlighted that these constraints were historical, and that this
   history was woven by the interactions of living beings. We then studied
   these interactions to show that they had a normative dimension: they
   may be vital or fatal for the survival of organisms, and they redefine
   their conditions of existence. This led us to reconceptualise
   biological constraints in evolution in terms of evolutionary norms,
   embracing four characteristics. They appear as binding conditions for
   biological evolution (1), deriving from the evolutionary process
   itself, while channelling it and opening its future possibilities (2).
   These possibilities are not predetermined in a predefined phase space
   (3) but emerge from the very way in which living beings internalise
   these norms in practices specific to their particular situation (4).
   Finally, we have shown that conceiving biological constraints in
   evolution as evolutionary norms allows us to shed light on the modality
   of their causal power, inadequately captured by the categories of
   traditional logic inherited from Aristotle, while accounting for the
   nature of the entities at stake: biological agents. This concept of
   normativity is not intended to replace the existing work on
   constraints, nor the work on process biology, but it is meant to
   elucidate the role of constraints on the directions taken by biological
   evolution, bringing forward the agency of living beings.

Footnotes

   ^1Insofar as he wants to distinguish these constraints from the
   “classical”, i.e., functionalist, causes of Darwinism, he restricts his
   definition of constraints to morphological structuralism.

   ^2It should be stressed that the modality they propose is rooted in a
   metaphysics of powers that presuppose a non-necessitarian conception of
   causality in general, and not just for certain processes. We do not
   wish to get into such a metaphysical consideration but use their model
   to consider the modality of biological phenomena, insofar as it allows
   us to overcome Aristotelian logic by thinking causality in a processual
   way.

   Publisher's Note

   Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
   published maps and institutional affiliations.

References

     * Aristotle (2009). Prior analytics. Translated by G. Striker. Oxford
       University Press.
     * Aristotle (2017). On interpretation. Translated by E. M. Edghill.
       Oxford University Press.
     * Bailly F, Longo G. Biological organization and anti-entropy.
       Journal of Biological Systems. 2009;17(1):63–96. [Google Scholar]
     * Brooks DR, Wiley EO. Evolution as entropy. Toward a unified theory
       of biology. University of Chicago Press; 1988. [Google Scholar]
     * Canguilhem G. Le normal et le pathologique. Presses Universitaires
       de France; 1966. [Google Scholar]
     * Caporael LR, Griesemer JR, Wimsatt WC. Developing scaffolds in
       evolution, culture, and cognition. The MIT Press; 2014. [Google
       Scholar]
     * Charlat S, Reuter M, Dyson EA, Hornett EA, Duplouy A, Davies N,
       Roderick GK, Wedell N, Hurst GDD. Male-killing bacteria trigger a
       cycle of increasing male fatigue and female promiscuity. Current
       Biology. 2007;17:273–277. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Cordaux R, Bouchon D, Grève P. The impact of endosymbionts on the
       evolution of host sex-determination mechanisms. Trends in Genetics.
       2011;27:332–341. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Darwin, C. (2001). On the origin of species (pp. 18202–1291). The
       Pennsylvania State University, Electronic Classics Series, Jim
       Manis, Faculty Editor, PA.
     * Dawkins R. The blind watchmaker: Why the evidence of evolution
       reveals a universe without design. W. W. Norton & Company Inc;
       1996. [Google Scholar]
     * Dedeine F, Vavre F, Fleury F, Loppin B, Hochberg ME, Bouletreau M.
       Removing symbiotic Wolbachia bacteria specifically inhibits
       oogenesis in a parasitic wasp. PNAS. 2001;98:6247–6252. [PMC free
       article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Dennett DC. Darwin’s dangerous idea. Evolution and the meanings of
       life. Penguin Books; 1995. [Google Scholar]
     * Dupré J, Nicholson DJ. A manifesto for a processual philosophy of
       biology. In: Dupré J, Nicholson DJ, editors. Everything flows:
       Towards a processual philosophy of biology. Oxford University
       Press; 2018. pp. 3–48. [Google Scholar]
     * Dyson EA, Hurst GDD. Persistence of an extreme sex-ratio bias in a
       natural population. PNAS. 2004;101:6520–6523. [PMC free article]
       [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Fisher R. Creative aspects of natural law. The a. S. Eddington
       Memorial Lecture. 1950;4:179–184. [Google Scholar]
     * Fodor J. Why pigs don’t have wings. London Review of Books.
       2007;29(20):19–22. [Google Scholar]
     * Fodor J, Piattelli-Palmarini M. What darwin got wrong. Profile
       Books; 2011. [Google Scholar]
     * Gould SJ. The structure of evolutionary theory. Harvard University
       Press; 2002. [Google Scholar]
     * Gould SJ, Lewontin R. The spandrels of San Marco and the
       Panglossian paradigm: A critique of the adaptationist programme.
       Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, B.
       1979;205(1161):581–598. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Gould SJ, Vrba ES. Exaptation-a missing term in the science of
       form. Paleobiology. 1982;8(1):4–15. [Google Scholar]
     * Grene M. Aristotle and modern biology. Journal of the History of
       Ideas. 1972;33(3):395–424. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Jacob F. Evolution and tinkering. Science.
       1977;196(4295):1161–1166. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Kingsolver JG, Koehl MAR. Aerodynamics, thermoregulation, and the
       evolution of insect wings: Differential scaling and evolutionary
       change. Evolution. 1985;39:488–504. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Leclercq S, Thézé J, Chebbi MA, Giraud I, Moumen B, Ernenwein L,
       Grève P, Gilbert C, Cordaux R. Birth of a W sex chromosome by
       horizontal transfer of Wolbachia bacterial symbiont genome.
       Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA.
       2016;113:15036–15041. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Longo G., Montévil M. & Kauffman S. (2012). No entailing laws, but
       enablement in the evolution of the biosphere. In GEECO’12:
       Proceedings of the 14th annual conference companion on Genetics and
       evolutionary computation, 1379–1392.
     * Longo G. How future depends on past and on rare events in systems
       of life. Foundations of Science. 2018;23(3):443–474. [Google
       Scholar]
     * McShea DW, Brandon RN. Biology’s first law: The tendency for
       diversity and complexity to increase in evolutionary systems.
       University of Chicago Press; 2010. [Google Scholar]
     * Méthot P-O, Alizon S. What is a pathogen? Toward a process view of
       host- pathogen interactions. Virulence. 2015;5:775–785. [PMC free
       article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Miquel P-A, Hwang S-Y. From physical to biological individuation.
       Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology. 2016;122(1):51–57.
       [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Montévil, M. (2020). Historicity at the heart of biology. Theory in
       Biosciences. [PubMed]
     * Montévil M. Possibility spaces and the notion of novelty: From
       music to biology. Synthese. 2019;196:4555–4581. [Google Scholar]
     * Montévil M, Mossio M. Biological organisation as closure of
       constraints. Journal of Theoretical Biology. 2015;372:179–191.
       [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Moreau J, Rigaud T. Variable male potential of reproduction: High
       male mating capacity as an adaptation to parasite-induced excess of
       females? Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B:
       Biological Sciences. 2003;270:1535–1540. [PMC free article]
       [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Mumford S, Anjum LR. Getting causes from powers. Oxford University
       Press; 2011. [Google Scholar]
     * Mumford S, Anjum LR. What tends to be. The philosophy of
       dispositional modality. Routledge; 2018. [Google Scholar]
     * Mumford S, Anjum LR. Dispositionalism: A dynamic theory of
       causation. In: Dupré J, Nicholson DJ, editors. Everything flows:
       Towards a processual philosophy of biology. Oxford University
       Press; 2018. pp. 61–75. [Google Scholar]
     * Neumann CJ, Nüsslein-Volhard C. Patterning of the zebrafish retina
       by a wave of Sonic Hedgehog activity. Science. 2000;289:2137–2139.
       [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Rigaud T, Juchault P. Genetic control of the vertical transmission
       of a cytoplasmic sex factor in Armadillidium vulgare Latr.
       (Crustacea, Oniscidea) Heredity. 1992;68:47–52. [Google Scholar]
     * Rigaud T, Juchault P. Conflict between feminizing sex ratio
       distorters and an autosomal masculinizing gene in the terrestrial
       isopod Armadillidium vulgare Latr. Genetics. 1993;133:247–252. [PMC
       free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Simons P. Processes and precipitates. In: Dupré J, Nicholson DJ,
       editors. Everything flows: Towards a processual philosophy of
       biology. Oxford University Press; 2018. pp. 49–60. [Google Scholar]
     * Sinclair M. Being inclined: Felix ravaisson's philosophy of habit.
       Oxford University Press; 2019. [Google Scholar]
     * Soto A, Longo G, Miquel P-A, Montévil M, Mossio M, Perret N,
       Pocheville A, Sonnenschein C. Toward a theory of organisms: Three
       founding principles in search of a useful integration. Progress in
       Biophysics and Molecular Biology. 2016;122(1):77–82. [PMC free
       article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Soto A, Longo G, Montévil M, Sonnenschein C. The biological default
       state of cell proliferation with variation and motility, a
       fundamental principle for a theory of organisms. Progress in
       Biophysics and Molecular Biology. 2016;122(1):16–23. [PMC free
       article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Van Valen L. A new evolutionary law. Evolutionary Theory.
       1973;1:1–30. [Google Scholar]
     * Walsh D. Organisms, agency, and evolution. Cambridge University
       Press; 2015. [Google Scholar]
     * West-Eberhard MJ. Developmental plasticity and evolution. Oxford
       University Press; 2003. [Google Scholar]
     * Woltereck R. Weitere experimentelle Untersuchungen über
       Artveränderung, speziel über dasWesen quantitativer Artunterschiede
       bei Daphnien. Verhandlungen Der Deutschen Zoologischen
       Gesellschaft. 1909;19:110–173. [Google Scholar]
     * “Norm”. Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary, Merriam-Webster. Available
       at: https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/norm./Accessed 1
       July 2021
     * “Norme” ATILF - CNRS & Université de Lorraine. TLFi : Trésor de la
       langue Française informatisé. Available at :
       https://www.cnrtl.fr/definition/norme Accessed 1 July 2021
     __________________________________________________________________

   Articles from History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences are provided
   here courtesy of Springer
     __________________________________________________________________

Other Formats

     * PubReader
     * PDF (648K)

Actions

     * (BUTTON) Cite
     *

   (BUTTON) Collections
   Add to Collections
     * ( ) Create a new collection
     * (*) Add to an existing collection

   Name your collection: ____________________
   Name must be less than characters
   Choose a collection:
   Unable to load your collection due to an error
   Please try again
   (BUTTON) Add (BUTTON) Cancel

        Share

     *
     *
     * (BUTTON)
       Permalink
       https://www.ncbi.nlm (BUTTON) Copy

        RESOURCES

     * (BUTTON) Similar articles
     * (BUTTON) Cited by other articles
     * (BUTTON) Links to NCBI Databases

   (BUTTON) [x]
   Cite
   (BUTTON) Copy Download .nbib .nbib
   Format: [NLM]

   Follow NCBI

   Connect with NLM
     *
     *
     *

   National Library of Medicine
   8600 Rockville Pike
   Bethesda, MD 20894

   Web Policies
   FOIA
   HHS Vulnerability Disclosure

   Help
   Accessibility
   Careers
     * NLM
     * NIH
     * HHS
     * USA.gov
