   Education
   Sign In
   (BUTTON) Menu
   Donate

ENCYCLOPEDIC ENTRY

ENCYCLOPEDIC ENTRY

Genetic Variation

Genetic Variation

   Genetic variation is the presence of differences in sequences of genes
   between individual organisms of a species. It enables natural
   selection, one of the primary forces driving the evolution of life.

Grades

   5 - 8

Subjects

   Biology, Genetics

   Image

genetic variation

   In many species, special genetic variations give animals a camouflaged
   appearance to blend in with their environment, like this Catalpa Sphinx
   moth (Ceratomia catalpae) which uses its textured wings to blend in
   with a tree's bark.

     Photograph by J.S. Houser

   In many species, special genetic variations give animals a camouflaged
   appearance to blend in with their environment, like this Catalpa Sphinx
   moth (Ceratomia catalpae) which uses its textured wings to blend in
   with a tree's bark.
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON) Article (BUTTON) Vocabulary

   Genetic variation refers to differences among the genomes of members of
   the same species. A genome is all the hereditary information—all the
   genes—of an organism. For instance, the human genome contains somewhere
   between twenty and twenty-five thousand genes.

   Genes are units of hereditary information, and they carry instructions
   for building proteins. The genes that are encoded within these proteins
   are what enable cells to function. Most organisms that reproduce
   sexually have two copies of each gene, because each parent cell or
   organism donates a single copy of its genes to its offspring.
   Additionally, genes can exist in slightly different forms, called
   alleles, which further adds to genetic variation.

   The combination of alleles of a gene that an individual receives from
   both parents determines what biologists call the genotype for a
   particular trait, such as hair texture. The genotype that an individual
   possesses for a trait, in turn, determines the phenotype—the observable
   characteristics—such as whether that individual actually ends up with
   straight, wavy, or curly hair.

   Genetic variation within a species can result from a few different
   sources. Mutations, the changes in the sequences of genes in DNA, are
   one source of genetic variation. Another source is gene flow, or the
   movement of genes between different groups of organisms. Finally,
   genetic variation can be a result of sexual reproduction, which leads
   to the creation of new combinations of genes.

   Genetic variation in a group of organisms enables some organisms to
   survive better than others in the environment in which they live.
   Organisms of even a small population can differ strikingly in terms of
   how well suited they are for life in a certain environment. An example
   would be moths of the same species with different color wings. Moths
   with wings similar to the color of tree bark are better able to
   camouflage themselves than moths of a different color. As a result, the
   tree-colored moths are more likely to survive, reproduce, and pass on
   their genes. This process is called natural selection, and it is the
   main force that drives evolution.

Credits

Media Credits

   The audio, illustrations, photos, and videos are credited beneath the
   media asset, except for promotional images, which generally link to
   another page that contains the media credit. The Rights Holder for
   media is the person or group credited.

Director

   Tyson Brown, National Geographic Society

Author

   National Geographic Society

Production Managers

   Gina Borgia, National Geographic Society
   Jeanna Sullivan, National Geographic Society

Program Specialists

   Sarah Appleton, National Geographic Society, National Geographic
   Society
   Margot Willis, National Geographic Society

other

Last Updated

   October 19, 2023

User Permissions

   For information on user permissions, please read our Terms of Service.
   If you have questions about how to cite anything on our website in your
   project or classroom presentation, please contact your teacher. They
   will best know the preferred format. When you reach out to them, you
   will need the page title, URL, and the date you accessed the resource.

Media

   If a media asset is downloadable, a download button appears in the
   corner of the media viewer. If no button appears, you cannot download
   or save the media.

Text

   Text on this page is printable and can be used according to our Terms
   of Service.

Interactives

   Any interactives on this page can only be played while you are visiting
   our website. You cannot download interactives.

Related Resources

   National Geographic Headquarters
   1145 17th Street NW
   Washington, DC 20036

ABOUT

   National Geographic SocietyNatGeo.comNews and ImpactContact Us

Explore

   Our ExplorersOur ProgramsEducationNat Geo LiveStorytellers
   CollectiveTraveling Exhibitions

Join Us

   Ways to GiveApply for a GrantCareers
   donate
   get updates

Connect

   National Geographic Society is a 501 (c)(3) organization. © 1996 - 2024
   National Geographic Society. All rights reserved.
   Privacy Notice|Sustainability Policy|Terms of Service|Code of Ethics
