   Education
   Sign In
   (BUTTON) Menu
   Donate

ENCYCLOPEDIC ENTRY

ENCYCLOPEDIC ENTRY

Adaptation

Adaptation

   Evolutionary adaptation, or simply adaptation, is the adjustment of
   organisms to their environment in order to improve their chances at
   survival in that environment.

Grades

   5 - 8

Subjects

   Biology, Ecology, Conservation

   Image

seahorse

   Some creatures, such as this leafy sea dragon fish (Phycodurus eques)
   have evolved adaptations that allow them to blend in with their
   environment (in this case, seaweed) to avoid the attention of hungry
   predators.

     Photograph by Paul Zahl

   Some creatures, such as this leafy sea dragon fish (Phycodurus eques)
   have evolved adaptations that allow them to blend in with their
   environment (in this case, seaweed) to avoid the attention of hungry
   predators.
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON) Article (BUTTON) Vocabulary

   In evolutionary theory, adaptation is the biological mechanism by which
   organisms adjust to new environments or to changes in their current
   environment. Although scientists discussed adaptation prior to the
   1800s, it was not until then that Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel
   Wallace developed the theory of natural selection.

   Wallace believed that the evolution of organisms was connected in some
   way with adaptation of organisms to changing environmental conditions.
   In developing the theory of evolution by natural selection, Wallace and
   Darwin both went beyond simple adaptation by explaining how organisms
   adapt and evolve. The idea of natural selection is that traits that can
   be passed down allow organisms to adapt to the environment better than
   other organisms of the same species. This enables better survival and
   reproduction compared with other members of the species, leading to
   evolution.

   Organisms can adapt to an environment in different ways. They can adapt
   biologically, meaning they alter body functions. An example of
   biological adaptation can be seen in the bodies of people living at
   high altitudes, such as Tibet. Tibetans thrive at altitudes where
   oxygen levels are up to 40 percent lower than at sea level. Breathing
   air that thin would cause most people to get sick, but Tibetans’ bodies
   have evolved changes in their body chemistry. Most people can survive
   at high altitudes for a short time because their bodies raise their
   levels of hemoglobin, a protein that transports oxygen in the blood.
   However, continuously high levels of hemoglobin are dangerous, so
   increased hemoglobin levels are not a good solution to high-altitude
   survival in the long term. Tibetans seemed to have evolved genetic
   mutations that allow them to use oxygen far more efficently without the
   need for extra hemoglobin.

   Organisms can also exhibit behavioral adaptation. One example of
   behavioral adaptation is how emperor penguins in Antarctica crowd
   together to share their warmth in the middle of winter.

   Scientists who studied adaptation prior to the development of
   evolutionary theory included Georges Louis Leclerc Comte de Buffon. He
   was a French mathematician who believed that organisms changed over
   time by adapting to the environments of their geographical locations.
   Another French thinker, Jean Baptiste Lamarck, proposed that animals
   could adapt, pass on their adaptations to their offspring, and
   therefore evolve. The example he gave stated the ancestors of giraffes
   might have adapted to a shortage of food from short trees by stretching
   their necks to reach higher branches. In Lamarck’s thinking, the
   offspring of a giraffe that stretched its neck would then inherit a
   slightly longer neck. Lamarck theorized that behaviors aquired in a
   giraffe's lifetime would affect its offspring. However, it was Darwin’s
   concept of natural selection, wherein favorable traits like a long neck
   in giraffes suvived not because of aquired skills, but because only
   giraffes that had long enough necks to feed themselves survived long
   enough to reproduce. Natural selection, then, provides a more
   compelling mechanism for adaptation and evolution than Lamarck's
   theories.

Credits

Media Credits

   The audio, illustrations, photos, and videos are credited beneath the
   media asset, except for promotional images, which generally link to
   another page that contains the media credit. The Rights Holder for
   media is the person or group credited.

Director

   Tyson Brown, National Geographic Society

Author

   National Geographic Society

Production Managers

   Gina Borgia, National Geographic Society
   Jeanna Sullivan, National Geographic Society

Program Specialists

   Sarah Appleton, National Geographic Society, National Geographic
   Society
   Margot Willis, National Geographic Society

other

Last Updated

   October 19, 2023

User Permissions

   For information on user permissions, please read our Terms of Service.
   If you have questions about how to cite anything on our website in your
   project or classroom presentation, please contact your teacher. They
   will best know the preferred format. When you reach out to them, you
   will need the page title, URL, and the date you accessed the resource.

Media

   If a media asset is downloadable, a download button appears in the
   corner of the media viewer. If no button appears, you cannot download
   or save the media.

Text

   Text on this page is printable and can be used according to our Terms
   of Service.

Interactives

   Any interactives on this page can only be played while you are visiting
   our website. You cannot download interactives.

Related Resources

   National Geographic Headquarters
   1145 17th Street NW
   Washington, DC 20036

ABOUT

   National Geographic SocietyNatGeo.comNews and ImpactContact Us

Explore

   Our ExplorersOur ProgramsEducationNat Geo LiveStorytellers
   CollectiveTraveling Exhibitions

Join Us

   Ways to GiveApply for a GrantCareers
   donate
   get updates

Connect

   National Geographic Society is a 501 (c)(3) organization. © 1996 - 2024
   National Geographic Society. All rights reserved.
   Privacy Notice|Sustainability Policy|Terms of Service|Code of Ethics
