   Education
   Sign In
   (BUTTON) Menu
   Donate

IDEA SET

IDEA SET

Evolution: Changing Species Over Time

Evolution: Changing Species Over Time

   Evolution is the process by which species adapt over time in response
   to their changing environment. Use these ideas to teach about the water
   cycle in your classroom.

Grades

   6 - 8

Subjects

   Biology, Ecology, Genetics
   Though they've been extinct for millions of years, the prehistoric
   group of crustaceans called trilobites (literally "three lobes") were
   some of the most successful early animals, and were prevalent the ocean
   for hundreds of millions of years.

     Photograph by James L. Amos

   (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON)

   Evolution is an important field of study for scientists. It covers the
   study of changes organisms have undergone over time in response to
   different factors in their environment. All organisms, including
   humans, evolve over time. Evolution occurs through natural selection,
   and is a force that has shaped every organism living today.
   When developing his theory of evolution and the concept of natural
   selection, Charles Darwin studied the species of finches in the
   Galapagos Islands and hypothesized that they all originated from a
   single common ancestor.

Darwin’s Finches

   Have the students read about and research the finches Darwin studied on
   the Galapagos Islands. Darwin noticed that different finches had
   differently shaped beaks. He also noticed that the various beak shapes
   were each best suited for handling certain types of food. Darwin knew
   that the finches had come from continental South America originally,
   but those that he saw on the islands were unlike the ones on the
   mainland. Darwin wondered what caused these finches to change when they
   made it to the Galapagos Islands. Have students test the ability of
   different beaks to get different types of food. Provide students with
   spoons, forks, metal binders clip, and tweezers to represent different
   types of beaks and food bowl with foam packing peanuts, small bird
   seed, large bird seed (sunflower seeds), and toothpicks. Have student
   try the different tools and identify which tool works best with which
   foods.
   As the Earth grows warmer due to climate change, the colorful, lush,
   but delicate ecosystems of coral reefs are being forced to evolve
   quickly to survive the stresses of a warming planet.

National Geographic Explorer Jingchun Li: Evolution of “Living Solar Panels”

   The first thing you notice when visiting a healthy marine coral reef is
   the number of different fishes and the many bright colors of both the
   fishes and the corals. Marine biodiversity refers to the richness of
   different species living together in a community. Have the students
   read about National Geographic Explorer Jingchun Li and her research on
   marine biodiversity and biologically productive coral reef ecosystems.
   Li is studying how coral reefs and other organisms are undergoing
   macroevolution to cope with the stresses created by human disturbances
   to their ecosystem.

   Divide students into groups. Ask the students what stresses are taking
   place in the marine environment that coral reefs and other marine
   organisms need to adapt to. Have them divide into small groups and
   research these changes and design solutions to address these
   disturbances.
   Modern humans, Homo sapiens, owe their existence to a collection of
   earlier, now-extinct Homo species, like this Homo
   neanderthalensis, who's skull appears similar, but not quite identical,
   to the skulls of modern humans.

Human Evolution

   Scientists who study early humans depend on fossil evidence to help
   them sort out how our ancestors evolved over time. When looking at the
   fossils, scientists look for clues to changes in different
   characteristics such as brain size, skull shape, locomotion, and jaw
   size. Have the students learn about human evolution, then have them
   work through the Mystery Skull Interactive to use clues to identify
   fossils.
   The Count Raggi's bird of paradise (Paradisaea raggiana) is not only a
   stunningly colorful and elegant bird, it is also the national bird of
   Papua New Guinea.

Evolution in Isolation

   Have the students watch the video about the birds living on the island
   of Papua in Indonesia. This isolated island is a paradise with a lush
   and resource-rich habitat. Male birds of many different species have
   evolved elaborate ways of attracting mates. Ask the students, why is it
   important for a species to have the strongest males mate with the
   females and how does this affect the species?
   Jeremy Martin excavates crocodile fossils from Cretaceous sediment to
   better understand how crocodiles have evolved over millions of years.

National Geographic Explorer Jeremy Emiland Martin: Evolution of Crocodiles

   Have the students read about Jeremy Emiland Martin’s work on the
   evolution of crocodiles and then have them research how modern
   crocodiles have been evolving since the time of the dinosaurs. Because
   crocodiles are found in so many different areas of the world, it is
   important to go back to where they first emerged to learn about their
   evolutionary beginnings. Ask the students, how have crocodiles evolved
   since the Cretaceous Period? What might have caused crocodiles to
   evolve? Why were these traits favorable in this particular environment?

Credits

Media Credits

   The audio, illustrations, photos, and videos are credited beneath the
   media asset, except for promotional images, which generally link to
   another page that contains the media credit. The Rights Holder for
   media is the person or group credited.

Director

   Tyson Brown, National Geographic Society

Author

   National Geographic Society

Production Managers

   Gina Borgia, National Geographic Society
   Jeanna Sullivan, National Geographic Society

Program Specialists

   Sarah Appleton, National Geographic Society, National Geographic
   Society
   Margot Willis, National Geographic Society

other

Last Updated

   October 19, 2023

User Permissions

   For information on user permissions, please read our Terms of Service.
   If you have questions about how to cite anything on our website in your
   project or classroom presentation, please contact your teacher. They
   will best know the preferred format. When you reach out to them, you
   will need the page title, URL, and the date you accessed the resource.

Media

   If a media asset is downloadable, a download button appears in the
   corner of the media viewer. If no button appears, you cannot download
   or save the media.

Text

   Text on this page is printable and can be used according to our Terms
   of Service.

Interactives

   Any interactives on this page can only be played while you are visiting
   our website. You cannot download interactives.

Related Resources

   National Geographic Headquarters
   1145 17th Street NW
   Washington, DC 20036

ABOUT

   National Geographic SocietyNatGeo.comNews and ImpactContact Us

Explore

   Our ExplorersOur ProgramsEducationNat Geo LiveStorytellers
   CollectiveTraveling Exhibitions

Join Us

   Ways to GiveApply for a GrantCareers
   donate
   get updates

Connect

   National Geographic Society is a 501 (c)(3) organization. © 1996 - 2024
   National Geographic Society. All rights reserved.
   Privacy Notice|Sustainability Policy|Terms of Service|Code of Ethics
