   Education
   Sign In
   (BUTTON) Menu
   Donate

ENCYCLOPEDIC ENTRY

ENCYCLOPEDIC ENTRY

Theory of Evolution

Theory of Evolution

   The theory of evolution is a shortened form of the term “theory of
   evolution by natural selection,” which was proposed by Charles Darwin
   and Alfred Russel Wallace in the nineteenth century.

Grades

   5 - 8

Subjects

   Biology, Ecology, Earth Science, Geology, Geography, Physical Geography

   Image

Young Charles Darwin

   Painting of a young Charles Darwin

     Photograph by James L. Stanfield

   Painting of a young Charles Darwin
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON) Article (BUTTON) Vocabulary

   Ideas aimed at explaining how organisms change, or evolve, over time
   date back to Anaximander of Miletus, a Greek philosopher who lived in
   the 500s B.C.E. Noting that human babies are born helpless, Anaximander
   speculated that humans must have descended from some other type of
   creature whose young could survive without any help. He concluded that
   those ancestors must be fish, since fish hatch from eggs and
   immediately begin living with no help from their parents. From this
   reasoning, he proposed that all life began in the sea.

   Anaximander was correct; humans can indeed trace our ancestry back to
   fish. His idea, however, was not a theory in the scientific meaning of
   the word, because it could not be subjected to testing that might
   support it or prove it wrong. In science, the word “theory” indicates a
   very high level of certainty. Scientists talk about evolution as a
   theory, for instance, just as they talk about Einstein’s explanation of
   gravity as a theory.

   A theory is an idea about how something in nature works that has gone
   through rigorous testing through observations and experiments designed
   to prove the idea right or wrong. When it comes to the evolution of
   life, various philosophers and scientists, including an
   eighteenth-century English doctor named Erasmus Darwin, proposed
   different aspects of what later would become evolutionary theory. But
   evolution did not reach the status of being a scientific theory until
   Darwin’s grandson, the more famous Charles Darwin, published his famous
   book On the Origin of Species. Darwin and a scientific contemporary of
   his, Alfred Russel Wallace, proposed that evolution occurs because of a
   phenomenon called natural selection.

   In the theory of natural selection, organisms produce more offspring
   than are able to survive in their environment. Those that are better
   physically equipped to survive, grow to maturity, and reproduce. Those
   that are lacking in such fitness, on the other hand, either do not
   reach an age when they can reproduce or produce fewer offspring than
   their counterparts. Natural selection is sometimes summed up as
   “survival of the fittest” because the “fittest” organisms—those most
   suited to their environment—are the ones that reproduce most
   successfully, and are most likely to pass on their traits to the next
   generation.

   This means that if an environment changes, the traits that enhance
   survival in that environment will also gradually change, or evolve.
   Natural selection was such a powerful idea in explaining the evolution
   of life that it became established as a scientific theory. Biologists
   have since observed numerous examples of natural selection influencing
   evolution. Today, it is known to be just one of several mechanisms by
   which life evolves. For example, a phenomenon known as genetic drift
   can also cause species to evolve. In genetic drift, some
   organisms—purely by chance—produce more offspring than would be
   expected. Those organisms are not necessarily the fittest of their
   species, but it is their genes that get passed on to the next
   generation.

Credits

Media Credits

   The audio, illustrations, photos, and videos are credited beneath the
   media asset, except for promotional images, which generally link to
   another page that contains the media credit. The Rights Holder for
   media is the person or group credited.

Director

   Tyson Brown, National Geographic Society

Author

   National Geographic Society

Production Managers

   Gina Borgia, National Geographic Society
   Jeanna Sullivan, National Geographic Society

Program Specialists

   Sarah Appleton, National Geographic Society, National Geographic
   Society
   Margot Willis, National Geographic Society

other

Last Updated

   October 19, 2023

User Permissions

   For information on user permissions, please read our Terms of Service.
   If you have questions about how to cite anything on our website in your
   project or classroom presentation, please contact your teacher. They
   will best know the preferred format. When you reach out to them, you
   will need the page title, URL, and the date you accessed the resource.

Media

   If a media asset is downloadable, a download button appears in the
   corner of the media viewer. If no button appears, you cannot download
   or save the media.

Text

   Text on this page is printable and can be used according to our Terms
   of Service.

Interactives

   Any interactives on this page can only be played while you are visiting
   our website. You cannot download interactives.

Related Resources

   National Geographic Headquarters
   1145 17th Street NW
   Washington, DC 20036

ABOUT

   National Geographic SocietyNatGeo.comNews and ImpactContact Us

Explore

   Our ExplorersOur ProgramsEducationNat Geo LiveStorytellers
   CollectiveTraveling Exhibitions

Join Us

   Ways to GiveApply for a GrantCareers
   donate
   get updates

Connect

   National Geographic Society is a 501 (c)(3) organization. © 1996 - 2024
   National Geographic Society. All rights reserved.
   Privacy Notice|Sustainability Policy|Terms of Service|Code of Ethics
